# A Brief History of Religions in India
### Introduction
Much like how, in [[Hinduism]], there are multiple, simultaneously correct answers to the number of gods that exist in the belief system, it is easy to either argue that there is one, 3/5 (great religions), or thousands of belief systems in India. The source presents materials by theme rather than tradition or chronology.
### The Question of Hinduism
Hinduism is a group of interconnected traditions. 83% of India's population, or 700 million people, are Hindus, continuing the religion's historical dominance. Hinduism lacks a founding person or a particular holy text. As well, there is no formal governing body of Hinduism. Its lineage traces back longer than almost any other religion, whereas the concept of "being Hindu" is one of the newest major religious groupings, tracing to the 1800s, often lacking a shared consciousness beforehand. Hindu was used as a catch all term for South Asian non-muslims by Muslims and is the origin of the word India, referring to the Indus River. The concept of Hinduism was a useful tool to separate Indian society from their Christian colonizers. 
There are two competing views on the nature of Hinduism. Centralists see a continued, Sanskrit, brahmin-led orthodoxy centered around the Vedas. This ignores the widespread use of vernacular language and rituals, but, in the study of Hinduism, centralist anthologies were dominant. Pluralism, meanwhile, sees Hinduism as an umbrella term for a wide group of beliefs and practices. In this view, Vedas and brahmins are an out-of-touch strain of a wider Hindu world. The largest challenges to Hinduism have come from external traditions, which have varied in threat throughout history. These provocations have led to profound changes in Hindu practice.
### The Indo-Aryans and Vedas
The Aryans were a more technologically advanced pastoral culture emanating from Russia in 4000 BC who eventually moved to the Indian Subcontinent. Originally they were centered in [[Punjab]] but later maintained some presence in most of Northern India.
A Veda is a compendium of religious knowledge. The Veda as a whole contained multiple parts leading to a revelation, some central works and some auxiliary. The [[Rg Veda]] is a giant, central collection of religious hymns written between 1200-1000 BCE, and has clear political themes and cultural connections to this Punjabi Aryan culture. The Rig Veda condemned darker skinned, indigenous Indians as "stealers of cattle," and overall demonized them. The Indus River Valley Civilization likely spoke a Dravidian language and thus had ties to non-Aryan people. These "dasas", or indigenous Indians, were a descendent of this great culture and posed a threat to the Aryans. [[Indra]] was a prototypical warrior god who blessed the Aryans whereas Agni was the god of fire and inspiration, the most close to humans and thus the intermediary in prayer. At this point sacrifice was unstandardized, which would change in the future. Soma was a plant associated with sacrifice, whose juice aided ritual prayer. The visions gained by drinking the juice were not seen as hallucinations, but rather as more real than reality, a theme of a higher plane of reality that continues in Indian religious tradition.
### Sacrifice and Society
By 600 BCE the Indo Aryans transformed from a mostly nomadic culture to a mostly agricultural one. At this time, iron-working was developed, and this increase in productivity allowed for an increase in the importance of sacrifice in religious life. The idea of a class-based, occupational society also was developed at this time. The non-Indo Aryan people were changed from dasas to sudras, a lower class of laborers. Increase in production also allowed for a religious elite to develop and dedicate themselves to the study of religion, whereas sacrifice became a political tool of control. Sacrifice was a tool for control and unity. In later hymns of the Rg Veda, all of human kind arises from a primordial sacrifice. Brahman originally was used for inherently powerful hymns, but later referred to the religious class in society, and the term for powerful speech became mantra. The four original casts came from different body parts of the original sacrifice, religious brahmins from the mouth, warrior ksatriyas from the arms, mercantile vaisyas from the loins, and lower-class sudras from the feet. The varna [[Caste System]] was not static, but rather changed over time and was often contested. 
### The Upanishads and the Renunciatory Model
The auxiliary works of the Veda opened up more sophisticated version of sacrifice alongside opposition. Crucially, a priest must understand the meaning of a sacrifice while it is performed. The Upanishads tried to be and are often seen as the highest teachings. These teachings introduced hitherto unseen ideas into the Veda and questioned some core tenants. For instance, the idea of transmigration, returning to the world after death, was introduced in these teachings. [[Samsara]] is both the idea of returning to earth and the constant change of the world. Karman ([[Karma]]) is introduced as a concept in order to answer what determines the successive birth after death, but is primarily centered around sacrifice. The fruits of one's actions on earth have later fruits which determines one's place, and interestingly even gods can be reborn as humans if they fall from grace. Moksa, or a breaking of Samsara, can be achieved only by releasing oneself from desire. Sacrifice has a collective focus, whereas moksa departs from this paradigm by introducing individual responsibility. To achieve moksa, the Upanishads recommend asceticism with higher teaching. These vedic teachings formed a Hindu Orthodoxy, and adherents to vedic traditions placed themselves above vernacular forms of Hinduism even while the language of the Veda was unknown to most. New Hindu traditions tried to place themselves as new Vedas. Some Hindu groups reject the Veda, while some place them under deities. 
### The New Religions of the 6th Century BC
Some teachers, at this point, were willing to reject the Vedas and prior forms of sacrifice. Some proscribed fatalism, whereas other materialism and lack of life after death. Samsara, karman, and moksa were generally taken for granted in all of these new traditions. The nature of these concepts, however, was under scrutiny. [[Yoga]] is a term for physical and psychological practices that have a religious purpose, practices meant to restrain oneself. It is achieving oneself through practices that detach oneself from the physical world. Even some non-Hindus, like [[Sufism|Sufis]], adopted Yoga into their practice. At this time, both Jainism and Buddhism sprang, both centered around ascetism and rejection of the Vedas.
### Jainism
[[Jainism]] comes from the root for "to conquer," centering around a conquering of the senses and karma to purify the soul. Jinas are those who have conquered, and those who follow are jainas. Vardhamana Mahavira was the first Jain leader, who achieved moksa after leaving his aristocratic family, and soon gathered a following. His 11 primary disciples were all converted brahmins. Mahavira was not seen as human, but as something even possibly greater than divine. Lay followers should take vows and practice restraint, including [[Vegetarianism|vegetarianism]] and refraining from lying or violence. One should give wealth to the poor or monks in order to increase discipline. Devapuja is worshipping statues of jinas which serves a meditational purpose. Goddesses could intercede to help life on Earth. These rituals were meant to prepare for life as a renouncer. They take extreme monastic vows and initiation in order to eliminate karma. Sometimes jain renouncers would starve to death to gradually leave the body for purity of the soul, a voluntary practice. [[Chandragupta]] patronized the Jains. There is a split between the Svetambara, white robed Jains, and the Digambara, sky robed (not robed) Jains, which is mostly geographic. In the early medieval period Jains were often used by rulers, but under Islamic rule their influence faded and they lost patronage. 
### Buddhism
Buddhists follow Buddhas, or those who have awakened to the truth of all things (like how Jains follow Jinas or Hindus follow Brahmins). [[Siddhartha Gautama]], like Vardhamana Mahavira, gained enlightenment (nirvana) through ascetism. Buddhism is the attempt to replicate this experience on a mass scale. The Buddha sent his first 60 disciples to spread his teachings, making Buddhism a proselytizing faith. From 100s-600s, [[Buddhism]] was the major religion in Asia and likely the largest in the world. It was first a religious movement inside India before spreading out and developed other faiths. Monastics should not be completely separated from the world, instead preferring to work in small groups. Buddha renounced the Vedas and joked that Brahmins came out of the same reproductive organ as everyone else. Stupas, burial pyres with ashes of the Buddha or relics, were venerated by early Buddhists and were centers for worship. These informal means of worship were formalized into [[Puja]]. Bodhisattvas, those on the path to enlightenment, were venerated in [[Mahayana Buddhism]]. [[Ashoka]] converted to Buddhism in the 3rd century BCE and thus [[Buddhism]] became the imperial religion. He pursued dharma, or a common ethical code, and non-violence, a repudiation of animal sacrifice. Although his empire did not last much longer after his death, he became the model of a Buddhist ruler. By the seventh century, Buddhist influence was waning in India, and while still practice at court many monasteries were abandoned. Buddhism remained in the Himalayas and Tibet, but as Islam expanded, Buddhism lost its grasp of its homeland. The flight of the [[Dalai Lama]] during the [[Chinese Invasion of Tibet]] also led to refugees in India, and some lower caste members of society converted to Buddhism.
### Hinduism Redefined
The vedic orthodox movement in Hinduism was highly changed in response to these challenges. There were myriad new texts written during this period to attempt to redefine the Vedas. There were six philosophical schools also developed during this time period. Dharmasastra was an emerging body of literature seeking to define dharma. [[Dharma]] as a concept is meant to be actions that support order. They were very focused on giving certain roles in society to certain groups. The epics [[Mahabharata]] (and its appendix the Harivamsa) and Ramayana were penned at this time as well. These epics were focused on bardic retelling the stories of battles past, shaped by different storytellers until assuming a final form. The Mahabharata starts with the warrior class in chaos, not upholding dharma. A demon Ravana has also overcome Indra, and thus the cosmos was not in good order either. All beings on earth go to battle until demons are cleansed. Kings then reinstate order and uphold dharma. [[Vishnu]] was introduced as a deity that could overcome these demonic forces, even though he did appear in the Rg Veda. Vishnu guaranteed the sacrificial enclosure being the whole world, and went from a dwarf in the Rg Veda to a central deity by the Mahabharata. Vishnu took some of Indra's roles as protector against demons and a generally heroic god. He also often interceded in human affairs. He could take human avatars and kill demons as well. Vishnu incarnates himself as [[Krishna]] in the Harivamsa to destroy a usurper demon. In the Ramayana, Vishnu takes on the avatar of [[Rama]]. The idea of [[Avatara]] allowed Vishnu to at once be supreme and incorporate local deities. Krishna was likely originally a human hero whose story morphed into the divine. The Bhagavad Gita was the section incorporating the central theme of the Mahabharata. Krishna argues to a skeptical man unwilling to fight that worldly action to support dharma does not impede moska. 
From 300-700 CE we had the Gupta and post-Gupta ages, a time with Buddhist dominance with arising [[Shiva]] and Vishnu worship. Leaders both followed Vishnu and patronized Buddhism, a common strain in Indian history of patronising multiple religious groups. The Puranas were texts that articulated the theism of the epics. These texts were compiled over centuries and were of varying importance. They discuss everything from theology to town planning, but crucially describe ritual and mythology of Vishnu and Shiva. The creation and dissolution of the universe was seen as Vishnu's periods of activity and rest in the Vaisnava Puranas. His incarnations are systematised, even claiming that Buddha was one of his incarnations. Demons gained power through sacrifice, and thus Vishnu birthed Buddhism and Jainism to dissuade sacrifices to demons. Shiva is another deity that played a minor role in the Rg Veda which gained outsized importance. The Saiva Puranas claim that he is the paramount deity. Rudra was associated with destruction, and is offered tribute to spare from wrath rather than sacrifice for blessings. A benevolent side of Rudra was called Shiva. Vishnu is embedded in society, Shiva is an outsider. He is dual, both benevolent and destructive, a dancer and meditator among others. He is presented in one form as both male and female. The epics are primarily Vaisnava but recognize Shiva's growing power. Shiva will only momentarily assume a human form. The Svetasvatara Upanishad claims that Shiva is an absolute, which was used to legitimize the connection with this mythology. The Puranas form an inclusive pantheon. Brahma is introduced as the god of creation, sometimes senile and sometimes discerning. Others draw a three way distinction, Brahma creates, Vishnu preserves, Shiva destroys. The goddesses, particularly the consorts/wives of these three gods, also take on responsibilities. The Markaneya Purana claims an absolute goddess, often Durga, a warrior. This goddess is another assimilationist, taking local deity's powers as well. Often hymns of praise today are derived from these puranas, and they influenced temple design greatly. 
### Temple Hinduism
This theological transformation from the epics was complete by 700 CE, Vishnu and Shiva were venerated as supreme deities. Harsavardhana was the last Buddhist convert emperor, and emperors, instead of maintaining prestige from sacrifice, did so through the construction of temples. From 700-1200, Hinduism was paramount in India. Building temples to Shiva or Vishnu brought them to one's territory. Thus, in the competitive atmosphere of medieval India, temple building became a way for leaders to outcompete or prestige and dominance. A temple is a home for a god, and a statue is contained that would allow the deity to make himself present. The temple is constructed to symbolize the entire cosmos in order, and the temple itself serves a map to participate with the deity, and thus the worshipper moves towards the divine and the divine moves towards the worshipped. Mahendravarman viewed temple worship in a competitive way, his embrace of Shiva meant that, like Shiva, he was overlord over smaller kingdoms. All temples, from home shrines to magnificent constructions, serve the same purpose. Puja are transactions, both physical and spiritual, between a worshipper and the divine. These transactions likely originated from the autochthonous people of India rather than the Indo-Aryan society. Puja served as a replacement for sacrifice while maintaining some Vedic influence. In larger temples puja became grander as well. Some state that bhakti, or roughly devotion or enjoyment, was more important. It implies an intimacy and experience of a god. The term is also a more limited historical term for medieval movements stressing it. Bhakti poets did not necessarily criticize temple Hinduism but instead preferred their method. They used close detail in order to achieve closeness to their god. Poets also knew that, at some level, Shiva and Vishnu were unknowable. There was a mosaic of traditions in medieval India, and not even brahmans were unified in belief or practice. Sankara viewed temple worship as useful but below intellectual knowledge of the oneness of Brahman. Even in this time Buddhism and Jainism were still very alive, especially the former in the Himalayas. Jewish traders, Syriac Christian, and Muslim traders also all passed through the land. Parsis, or [[Zoroastrianism|Zoroastrian]] people, were also persecuted and fled to India. Although it was a religiously diverse land, there was some tension still, with polemics and pogroms against Jains and Buddhists taking place, especially in Southern India. 
### Islam in India
In Islam's first 150 years it was the quickest growing religious movement in history. Jihad against non-beleivers meant that Muslim kingdoms had the duty to expand and convert, while sometimes sacrificing Islamic [[Sharia]]. Turkic armies conquered [[Afghanistan]], [[Kashmir]], and [[Punjab]]. An Afghan leader sacked Buddhist and Hindu temples in Northern India. Qutb al-Din, in 1026, declared himself Sultan of [[Delhi]]. Other Islamic nations, especially in the Deccan and South, also existed. In 1526, [[Babur]] founded the [[Mughal Empire]]. From 1200-1700, Islam was the paramount religion of Northern India. The influence of the clerical elite was mixed. Sufis had better luck converting Indians, as it already shared features with some forms of Hinduism. The Islamic leaders influenced history, whereas Sufis made Islam an indigenous religion in its own right. 
There were severe differences between Islamic rulers and their Hindu masses, tensions not aided by the plundering of some Islamic rulers in the North. Orthodox Islam is monotheistic, and the [[Five Pillars of Islam]] are universal shared tenants, as is belief in the [[Quran]]. Hinduism was pluralistic while admitting superior gods. Prayer is collective in Islam, and mosques are meant to serve this collective need. Pilgrimage unified believers from across the Islamic world. Muslim leaders often destroyed Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain temples and placed mosques in their place, while Hindus may reconsecrate the same sites. In settled areas there was more tolerance. While not "people of the book" like Christians or Jews, Muslim leaders generally tolerated brahmins like Christian monks and allowed for construction (and, with Turkish/Mughal rulers, benefits toward the construction) of Hindu temples, while Hindu leaders also tolerated mosques. 
### Sikhism
[[Guru Nanak]], embroiled in the conflict between orthodox Islam and Hinduism, created the third path of [[Sikhism]]. Sikh is derived from Sanskrit for pupil, who followed Nanak after his enlightenment. Nanak repudiated Hinduism and Islam, stating that god has to be found within oneself. It has no form. He believed that repeating the divine name was a method of connecting to god but refused to share the name. He chose a particular disciple to follow him as leader and guru. Nanak's community of the faithful and leadership structure survived for 200 years along 10 gurus. Arjan, the fifth guru, compiled a central text, the Adi Granth, as a compilation of the teachings of the first five gurus. This book took the place of Hindu images at the center of a temple's alter. Sikhs also became a political unit. Gobind Singh, enemy of Mughal rule, urged followers to repudiate any other religious affiliations and take to wearing particular clothing. A Sikh kingdom in the 1800s, defeated in the 1840s, was the last major opponent of [[British Raj | British rule]], showing the extent to their political and military prowess. This Khalistan, or land of the pure, was a major dream of Sikhs since the partition. Sikhs form a prosperous bloc inside and outside South Asia.

### Full Citation:
Davis, Richard H., A Brief History of Religions in India, Introduction (3-35, 43-44)
Tags: #religion #culture/asia/india  #source
Dates Read: 11-1-2023
Date Created: 11-1-2023
Status: #status/unrefined 