# A Russian Teacher in America

## Russian Contrasts
[[Russia]], before the [[Russian Revolution]], was lead by a Tsarist Government with very low public access to education. The expanding access to education brought along many pseudo-educated people, whose expertise was never challenged due to their supervisors also not receiving a true education (a parody being revolutionaries giving out medicine certificates to uneducated workers, thinking that made them doctors). This led to some disasters, like [[Trofim Lysenko|Lysenko's]] disavowal of genetics. "I thought then and think now that it is a most important duty of a teacher of humans to teach them to be humans, that is, to behave reasonably in uncertain circumstances." This idea was popular in Russia, but was repudiated by American undergraduates. Anti-intellecutalism prospered in the [[Soviet Union]] while terrible excesses were contributed by the uneducated political elite. Mathematics and foreign literature challenged the Soviet public to think critically.

## Personal Background
The author came from a relatively open-minded family, and studied mathematics after succeeding in high-school competition math, going on to teach it. Moscow State University, like other advanced institutions, became a hotbed of dissent, leading to the author's move to the [[United States]]. 

## Teaching Algorithms at Boston University and Business Calc at a State College
Under the expectation that American commitments to democracy meant willingness to challenge students, he took a position teaching a graduate algorithms course at BU (CLRS based!). In this small setting, he was able to challenge students by finishing CLRS in one semester, which was appreciated. Undergraduate business calculus, however, had little originality, with students just wanting high grades. Students were disappointed in him not teaching to the text, possibly due to them not having a high comprehension of the textbook to begin with. He continually made exams that were too hard, despite trying to make them easy as students stumbled over algebra. This was the first environment where grades took a higher priority than learning and problems. Things such as asking for percent of grade from homework, or whether material would be covered on exams were red flags for this problem. To the author, promoting understanding was the point of a test: to students tests were the point of understanding. Departments allowed these behaviors to grow unfettered, meaning that people could learn for a grade, which signified that they had nothing to gain from the professor other than a grade: the author cared more about his safety from complaints than the students' learning. The true difference isn't that lazy students exist: it's that authorities bend to them, turning students who may have been engaged in learning for learning's sake into grade-grubbers as well.

## Culture and Parents
There are cultural attitudes between assigning blame for mistakes on lack of learning or a teacher having too high expectations. Some students are taught by parents to learn for learning's sake, others to do whatever is needed to pass. Most of the author's students in [[Moscow]] were children of intellectuals, unlike the US. Textbooks are modelled to look like serious dives into mathematical theory, but only provide recipes to solve rote problems. Likewise, American mathematicians scarcely care about teaching, viewing it as beyond their purview. Fake teaching breeds fake intellectualism, undermining the institution of teaching in the end.

## Some Problems in Elementary Mathematics
He starts courses by proving that .999... = 1 in order to challenge students' minds and make them critically examine their own beliefs. It is natural for people to love challenges, especially young students, but many undergraduates will take being wrong in one of these challenges as failure rather than a growth opportunity. Multiple choice testing leads to convenient grading, but a lack of emphasis on the process to actually solve problems. The artifact of a test, the choices, leave no reasoning to learn from and examine. Very few students will use mathematics in their life: many more will use the critical thinking gained, so an education based on recipes is teaching little of value. Doing the work of teaching critical thinking is not shiny and glamorous: modern, bombastic buzzword filled texts sound better to the market despite having less substance. Americans talk about giving everyone an education, but not of the quality of that education. The Soviets largely collapsed due to an unwillingness to face the gap between reality and political fiction: American education is similar. By learning only recipes, one becomes a part of the wider problem of lack of education rather than a solution, all the while some small subset of parents can afford for their children to have a real education. The winners of the modern world will be those with a population educated enough to solve its problems: before that America cannot have won the [[Cold War]].

### Full Citation:
Toom, Andrei. "A Russian Teacher in America." _American Educator: The Professional Journal of the American Federation of Teachers_, v17 n3 p9-13,20-25 Fall 1993
Tags: #mathematics #pedegogy #culture/america #culture/europe/russia #source
Dates Read: 6-1-2024
Date Created: 6-1-2024
Status: #status/unrefined 