# Confucianism
## Background
Confucianism as a philosophy was emergent from the teachings of Kongzi, a philospher during the [[Warring States Period]].  Fiercly loyal to the [[Zhou Dynasty]], he sought the stability of central leadership.  Confucianism stresses fillial piety and ritual in order to cultivate Ren, or concience, the cardinal virtue of Confucianism.  Other Confucian virtues include shu, or sympathetic understanding and dutifulness.  Confucian philosophers include Kongzi (Kongzi), Xunzi and Mengzi.  Confucianism had a large influence on literature, including ideals influencing works such as [[Water Margin]] (intermixed with [[Daoism]] and [[Buddhism]]).

## Benevolence
Benevolce, or Ren, is seen as a central Confucian virtue.  It can be seen in terms of reciprocity, or, phrased like the golden rule, doing to others what you would do to yourself.  It is cultivated through ritual and learning.  Benevolence is put on a pedestal; rulers are taught only to be good but not to be intelligent, because wise rulers bend the minds of their people and virtue conquers military might (14.5).  As well, people are taught to be good over learning technical skills (9.2, 13.4), and thus learning in a Confucian sense is more related to the study of benevolence.  Truly loving goodness is sufficient to start on the path (4.4), but Kongzi sees very few people as truly loving goodness.  Desire is seen as the enemy of goodness (12.18).  [[Mengzi#6|Mengzi]] sees human nature as fundamentally good, as people will help others even if they have nothing to gain, whereas [[Xunzi#23 Human Nature is Bad|Xunzi]] fundamentally disagrees and believes that human nature is fundamentally evil, as if humans were good there would be no need for ritual or learning, and sages would not exist.

## Ritual and Learning
Ritual is seen as an unquestionable good.  Without ritual, virtues are seen to deteriorate into sin.  Kongzi himself placed a high emphasis on exactness in ritual, while being able to question older standards Kongzi would meticulously arrange his ritual objects.  Mourning, for instance, has to be observed for three years as children are dependent on parents for three years.  In mourning, one withdraws from social life and from pleasures.  Failure to abide by this is seen as a failure in both ritual and filial piety.  Disciples are taught to follow the _Rites_ and _Odes_, older sources of Confucian wisdom.  Ritual can be seen as a way to instill good habits and thus goodness: whereas good actions are beneficial, ritual instills good intentions for future benevolence.  Kongzi believes that he has more to learn, and could become a truer gentleman himself.  Art, especially music, is seen as another important virtue, and a mastery of it instills some level of goodness.  [[Xunzi#19 Discourse on Ritual]], meanwhile, views ritual as evidence of human evilness, with sages and ritual forming an evil human nature into benevolence.

## Filial Piety
Filial piety is respect for ones parents and for brotherly love.  While often meaning direct parent relationships, where a child is to listen to their parents even if they are wrong (4.18) and to respect them, it also has political overtones.  For instance, 1.2 establishes filial piety as a guarantee that subjects will not revolt against their rulers.  Thus, it can be seen as an enforcement of Confucian stability and the ideal of the Zhou Dynasty.  However, leaders, like parents, also have duties to their subjects, as leaders should not tax beyond what is necessary (12.9).  Filial piety is even put above honesty (13.18), with lying to protect family as admissible.  [[Mengzi]] also says that abandoning filial piety to assuage resentment is permissible situationally.

## Asceticism
Salary is certainly deemphasized by Kongzi (4.12, 4.14), but not to the point of asceticism.  For instance, Kongzi chides a disciple for not taking a salary (6.5), as good can be done with it.  He also derides a fellow scholar who lives in isolation, viewing abandoning the social contract as not beneficial for the world.  Love of power and money is negative, but, like most of Confucian thought, the correctness of the action is situational.

## Politics
Both Confucius and [[Mengzi]] stress the importance of a "sage king," and believe that the righteousness of a ruler will sustain a people.  Mengzi, in 1A3, states that benevolence is requisite for good rule, and is the foundation for prosperity.  As well, in 1A7, stability and prosperity are seen to come from people flocking to benevolent rulers, and thus by guaranteeing basic living standards and promoting filial piety a realm will prosper.  Further, in 1B5 he states that personal failing of monarchs do not prohibit success, that love of wealth is permissible if such love is extended to one's subjects.  In 1B6 and 1B8 Mengzi also condones the overthrow and resignation of non-righteous rulers, that those monarchs who are killed often have killed and that incompetency from rulers would not be tolerated coming from subordinates.  Therefore, he formulates an early idea of the Mandate of Heaven, that righteous leaders will necessarily be successful, and, barring righteousness, the people have a right to expect benevolent rule.

## References:
[[Confucius' Analects]]
Tags: #philosophy/chinese #asia/china #religion
12-1-2022
Status: #status/draft