# Contemporary Jain Mandala Rituals
The tradition of Mandala making in [[Jainism]] is certainly ancient, at least dating to the fourteenth century. While historically called [[Yantra|yantras]], Digambara practice mostly uses the term mandala now. [[Mantra]] is used with mandala in contemporary Jain ritual. Body is used, juxtaposing the Jain denial of the importance of the physical world. A theory posits that the main ritual use of mandalas are to calm the mind and detach the observer from the chaos of the world, but fieldwork supports their use in ritual instead. Most monumental diagrams come from the Svetambara tradition, with easier access to materials than Digambara mandalas. 
Since the ninth century Jains have had an active liturgy used in ritual. Some rituals are focused on bhakti modeled after the 8-offering [[Puja]], and, by connecting with the jina on an emotional level, they gain virtue. Other rituals are more tantric, and are often performed in groups or by lay priests. While bhakti is a focus, the major point is of altering the cosmos. Rituals are performed at important times, or performed by monks upon their visit to a city, or even to avoid bad luck (unemployment, childlessness). A ritual to Santinath, the 16th jina, is most often performed after death. Some teachers say that performing rituals like these, other than Hindu/Muslim rituals which may not be compatible with ahimsa, provides virtue. Mandals are made of rice-flour or cloth for this ritual in Digambara practie (white rice and grain in Svetambara), and are often auspicious red. The design is often oriented around a sacred symbol, eg. om or hrim. Jain svastiks are put on the four corners as auspicious signs (representing heavenly beings, humans, animals, plants). Svetambara mandals are often auspicious designs rather than Digambara circles. Often a jina statue would be placed at the center of the mandal, but sometimes a metal yantra placed on a lion throne would be used instead. Both are cosmograms, but yantras are smaller. Yantras are icons and give blessings to its owners. Yantras are more prominent in Digambara tradition.
All worshippers come to the Jain temple already cleaned and cleansed. For certain rituals, worshippers recite a mantra days beforehand. In all ritual, imprecise pronunciation diminishes merit and thus religiously-trianed professionals are often employed. Offerings are made to the mandala as in the 8-fold puja. The temple becomes a sacred time and place in which the jina preached, with worshippers sometimes dressing as indras. Specialists can also give sermons to explain the point of rituals, to further increase merit. At the end of the ritual, the mandala is partially untied and opened so that the merit enters the world.
It is unknowable whether historical ritual was also congregational similar to modern day ritual.

### Full Citation:
Granoff PE, Granoff PE (Phyllis E. _Victorious Ones : Jain Images of Perfection / Phyllis Granoff, Editor._ Rubin Museum of Art; 2009.

Tags:  #religion #culture/asia/india #source
Dates Read:
Date Created: 1-3-2023
Status: #status/unrefined 