# Cuban Color in Tourism
Summary (My thoughts)
## Introduction
Tourism is used as a lens to focus on Cuban culture. Each county has its own historic relationship with tourism, but the status and belonging of tourists in developing countries have some universal elements. Tourists and hosts are often segregated in separate worlds, especially with regards to African tourism. The social aspect of race also permeates tourism. Locals interact with ideology in different ways, an especially important topic with regards to [[Cuba]].

## Race, Tourism, and Belonging in Cuba
The author, in their first visit to Cuba, was intentionally given an inferior drink to her white friends by a _jintero_ (hustler). They assumed that she was a Cuban prostitute, rather than another tourist. 
Tourism is a tool for Cuba to maintain its socialist system. The Cuban identity was black, set aside against the white foreign tourist, similar to older Cuban ideologies of race. The Communist idea that class equality would lead to racial equality has led to a systemic under-examination of race in Cuba. [[Brazil]] prizes its multi-racial democracy as a colorblind idea, much like how Cuba posits that their system is intolerant of racial discrimination. Blacks were considered the greatest "winners" in the [[Cuban Revolution]]. Tourism is a capitalist system that funnels money to the socialist government while also entrenching racial differences that pose an existential threat to the founding myth of the revolution. Europe and [[Canada]], the two main sources of tourists, are considered white countries. The threats posed by massive-scale international tourism are present in the Caribbean and as far as [[Thailand]]. Wealthy tourists are given privileged status on colonized land, and questions of where they do and don't belong are complex. A white minority is given access to luxury and power that a black majority is unable to enjoy.
[[Social Darwinism]] posited that lighter races outcompeted darker ones, a foundation of [[Scientific Racism]]. Others thought that material conditions impacted development, and, by giving an education, Native Americans among other groups could become culturally white. Latin American countries often believed in this cultural evolutionist approach, while Social Darwinism had more of a role in [[British Empire|British]] colonies. [[Franz Boas]], the so-called "father of American Anthropology," instead saw races as collections of cultures. He believed that race was socially constructed. In the modern American culture, race often refers to blackness, not whiteness, and gender women, not men. 
In Latin America, conceptions of color are linked with educational expectations and feelings of value. Those black citizens that succeeded in Latin American society were considered exceptional and culturally white. Mixed-race individuals were also cordoned off from criollo whites.
Cuban embrace of Caribbean identity is a post-[[Fall of the Soviet Union]] phenomenon. Traditional nationalism was more focused on socialism or a general latino culture, but, in the context of tourism, Caribbean-ness is a useful tool in a globalized world despite ideological commitment to anti-imperialism. After the agriculture-dependent economies of the 19th and 20th centuries failed, organizations like the [[International Monetary Fund]] encouraged industrialization that placed them in subordinate positions to developed economies (strange point of blame, personal disagreement of nefariousness of these organizations). Island tourism grew as a tool to develop economically. House [[Slavery in Cuba|slaves]] were replaced with disproportionately black service staff. [[Transnational Corporations]] often benefited the most economically from this arrangement, with taxes from these entities and low-wage jobs being the main economic benefits of this arrangement (although tourism also benefits local economy due to higher consumption). Post-revolution, tourism was seen as bourgeoisie, and "Cuba for Cubans" was a common refrain decrying the exclusion of Cubans from tourist spaces.
The fall of the USSR shifted "patria o muerte" to "socialismo o muerte," a reaction to [[Perestroika]] and liberalization of other Communist regimes. Socialism uses money as an incentive to produce rather than a measure of wealth: accumulation of money is seen as negative. [[Che Guevara]] wished for individuals to see self-satisfaction and responsibility as more important than wealth. A revolutionary leader reconciled the differences in classes by saying that each finger on a hand was different, but all were fingers. This acceptance of imperfections in socialism have allowed for such loopholes such as the tourism industry to be tolerated by the government.
Cubans sit while tourists have access to far greater luxury than they have. Neoliberal capitalism has opened developing nations to Western trade, not allowing for protectionism. Some critics say that this does not take into account the cultural context of each place (too bad). Cuba has survived its crises without access to international debt.

## Blackness and Race Matters in Cuba
The 1960s were a time in which serious discussions were had to remove American influence. The primary mission was raising the standard of living of the poor, with high enthusiasm for building a socialist society. This enthusiasm was dampened by the failed 10 million ton sugar harvest (see [[El Ingenio]]). Underdeveloped communist states were given preferential trade terms in the [[Soviet Union|USSR's]] [[Council of Mutual Economic Assistance]], which meant that Cubans had access to a far higher standard of living than production would have allowed.
Racial mixing, racial democracy, and a complex understanding of race are the cornerstones of raciality in Cuba. As few European women settled in the colonization of the Americas, Cuba became a mixed-race society quickly. These mixed-race people gained relative acceptance in society. Some could undergo "whitening" and partake in high society, but the existence of whitening means the "darkening" of those left out. Cuban racial consciousness was marked by a _mulato_-black common recognition of an outsider status. [[Slavery in Cuba]] led to an immediate stigmatisation and lowering of blackness. Thus, in the colonial era, whiteness had material and social advantages.
Marriage is a social construct: in [[Spain]], it was an institution to protect inheritances. European models of marriage did not have a high influence in its colonies. Due to a low number of clergy, divorce and polygamy was common in the Caribbean. Many endeavored to marry someone whiter than they. Foreign tourists are the equivalent of colonial white husbands: a ticket to higher class.
Freedom from Spain was largely pushed by Cuba's black population. Some were afraid of a rebellion against the white population like in the [[Haitian Revolution]]. The [[Ten Year's War]] (1868), Cuba's first war of independence, saw the emancipation of many slaves alongside reimbursements for slave owners. In the conclusion of the war in 1878, however, only slaves that fought were freed. [[José Martí]] advocated for antiracism and a raceless Cuban identity. He believed that the [[United States]] was a threat to Cuban sovereignty due to economic dependence. The [[Spanish-American War]] proved Marti right with the introduction of the [[Platt Amendment]]. The relationship with the USA led to some [[Jim Crow]] ideas becoming popularized among the Cuban white population. Some blamed blacks for the lack of respect for Cuba in general. Whites, including former loyalists, were promoted above black Cubans. The Partido Independiente de Color was a party advocating for the interests of black Cubans, and their unwillingness to disband in 1912 along with armed protest led to white militias killing thousands of black Cubans. Any outcry from blacks from this point was seen as unpatriotic.
The white-influenced black middle class culture was mostly ignored, but Afro-Cuban influence in culture was mainstream despite political alienation. American tourism in the forties and fifties helped solidify the idea that Cuban culture was Afro-Cuban culture. White culture did not appreciate art as a career, so black Cubans were able to take these roles. Many also studied European music. Many elite and middle-class establishments banned drums, a clear African-influence on music. American tourism, hungering for authenticity, largely popularized this style of music. Rumba and [[Santeria]] were embraced in the wake of wider acceptance of black culture in the Americas, like the [[Harlem Renaissance]]. These cultural influences of black culture still permeate today and chip away the ideal of racial democracy. Some biases have been helped by the revolution, but racial bias is still engrained in Cuba.

### Full Citation:
Tags: #culture/america/cuba #economics/development #tourism #source
Dates Read:
Date Created: 7-3-2023
Status: #status/draft