# Dai Nam
## Gia Long
Dai Nam was founded after Gia Long's victory in 1801 in the three-way civil war between the Thrinh, Tay Son, and Nguyen dynasties.  This new Nguyen dynasty was born from the South, and was seen as a primarily Southern dynasty throughout its entire existence.  Gia Long recognized Dai Nam's precarious situation, and rejected centralization throughout his rule.  He allowed military leaders to entrench themselves, especially in the South, let ethnic minorities have substantial self-control, and refused to elevate [[Buddhism]] or Catholicism.  He saw Chinese statecraft and [[Confucianism]] as the best model for Vietnam, and sought to unify the country over all else.  This was reflected in the creation of a North-South "Mandarin Route."
## Minh Mang
Minh Mang, meanwhile, lacked Gia Long's caution.  He viewed the centralized state as the most important project.  For a start, he reintroduced Confucian Civil Service exams, and wanted to uproot military control over the South in favor of a civil meritocracy.  He introduced state-sponsered trade with China and the West, and, after some prominent general's death, he revoked Southern military autonomy, executed former Tay Son rebels, and officially renamed the country to Dai Nam.  Minh Mang persecuted Islam, Buddhism, local religions, and, most importantly, Catholicism.  He imposed ancestor warship and got rid of autonomy for ethnic minorities.  He also briefly occupied Cambodia and part of Eastern Laos in the 1830s, using the [[Dai Viet]] justification that superior Chinese culture was occupying barbarous Southeast Asian culture.  Cambodia regained independence in 1841.  In 1833 to 1835, there was a substantial, Catholic and ethnic-minority based revolt which occupied the entirity of the South of the country, which lead Minh Mang's successors to curtail foreign travel. 
## Dai Nam after Minh Mang
Vietnam was surprisingly developed, especially in shipbuilding and trade.  Minh Mang's successors implemented some closing of foreign travel and trade, but did not completely close off the country.  However, in the late 1840s, cholera and famine killed off 8-10% of Vietnam's rural population despite government support.  Peasants had to sell property, decreasing needed tax revenue which increased unemployment: a cycle.  Support largely came from Buddhists and Catholics, increasing religious separation.
## France and Dai Nam
In the early 1820s to 1830s, England occupied Burma and Singapore, and the Dutch consolidated control over the Netherlands.  Bourbon French leaders sought a more active role in preaching Catholicism, and, during Gia Long's rule, Catholic missions spread.  Minh Mang, however, persecuted Catholicism, leading to a brief French occupation in 1858.  The French sought to construct a meridian from Africa to Asia, and wanted prestige and further ports to project naval power.  Thus, those engaged in industrialization and commerce were some of the most pro-colonial members of the French court, and France attacked Vietnam after two Spanish missionaries were executed.  The [[Qing Dynasty]] did not intervene to protect their tributaries.  In 1862, Dai Nam ceded 3 southeastern provinces to the French, and later in 1863 France occupied Cambodia.  In 1867, France also occupied the rest of Cochinchina, and this was recognized by Dai Nam in 1874.  In 1875, France constructed the colonial Bank of Indochina which supported development in these Southern lands.  A brief 1882 expedition occupied Hanoi before Qing intervention, but in 1883 the French attacked with a larger force, occupying Hue and the entire country.  In 1884, the Qing ceased recognizing Dai Nam as a tributary and complete French control over Tonkin was established.  After brief fighting with China, frontier, Chinese lead villages also surrendered.  Thailand ceded Cambodia and Laos, and [[French Indochina]] was born.
## References:
[[Vietnam, a New History]]
Tags:
10-1-2022
Status: #history/asia/southeast/vietnam#time/early-modern-era#time/renaissance-era #polity #status/draft