# Dai Viet
## Early Dai Viet
In the backdrop of Chinese [[Confucianism | Confucian]] Jiaozhi rule, Ngo Quyen, a Jiaozhi general, succesfully exploited the collapse of the [[Tang Dynasty]] to establish an independent Vietnamese polity.  This upset the [[Khmer Empire]] and [[Champa]]'s trade with China, and the position of the empire was precarious.  Ly Thai To formed the first dynasty after a brief civil war in 1009.  This dynastic rule was justified using Chinese notions of spirits and mythological history.  China acted like something akin to Rome in the Medieval era, with Vietnamese being written in Chinese characters, Chinese history forming the backbone of Dai Viet justification of its existance, and Confucianism's lasting influence on Vietnam.  However, the Ly dynasty only had effective control in Hanoi and the Red River Delta, with Buddhist local rulers often having more sway.  Ly Thai To sought to change Confucianism's place in Vietnam by elevating [[Buddhism]] as an official religion.  Coastal Dai Viet, meanwhile, was cosmopolitan, with traders from all over the world interacting.  Cham art, [[Song Dynasty]] ideas, and Vietnamese ceramics mingled.  Hanoi was the center of agricultural production, but these coastal areas were the heart of Dai Viet's commerce.  The Tran Dynasty was inherintly coastal.  They fended off Cham invasions and even collaborated to fend off Mongol invasion.  Tran rule also moved toward Confucianism.
The [[Ming Dynasty]] invaded and briefly indirectly ruled, but a 1418 rebellion successfully drove out the Ming in 1427 using modern military technology.  Ming civil service and philosophy left a mark on Dai Viet.  Le Loi established a new dynasty, and made a civil service exam and created a centralized tax system.  Finally, local leaders deferred to administrators.
## Colonial Dai Viet and Civil War
Vietnam also gained colonial ideals, calling themselves and Empire, in the name of the Han.  Le Thanh Tong conquered Champa in 1471, and took Tai land in 1479.  These campaigns were often brutal and led to Viet settlement in non-native lands.
Catholocism also gained some rural, poor influence (300k in the Red River Vally in mid 1700s), in the process creating the modern Vietnamese script.
However, in 1527, the Mac took power in a succession crisis.  The Le then relied on the Thrinh and Nguyen dynasties, which led to a two-Vietnam situation.  Nguyen Hoang superficially surrendered to the Thrinh, creating a Le dynasty with de-facto, [[Tokugawa Ieyasu]] style Thrinh control.  In fact, they had control over the Da Ngoai, Northern section, wheras Nguyen control was still felt in the Southern, Da Trong region.  The South, due to Cham influence, had much more Hindu and Buddhist influence.  Europeans, Arabs, Persians joined Asian empires in congregating in Dai Viet ports.  In 1627, Civil War reerupted, which led to stalemate and a true two-Vietnam situation, and in 1709 the Nguyen attempted to create a seperate state. 
In 1771, three brothers took advantage of high taxes and decreased trade to rebel in a village called Tay Son.  Quickly making peace with the Thrinh, they successfully killed the Nguyen Monarch in 1777.  They proclaimed their own dynasty in 1778, creating a Thrinh Hanoi base, Nguyen Mekong, and Tay Son Vijaya.  In 1786, the Tay Son even took over Hanoi, leading to a [[Qing Dynasty]] intervention on behalf of their tributary Le dynasty.  However, the new emperor Quang Trung miraculously drove these invading armies out, which is mythologized to this day.  After Quang's death, Gia Long, a Nguyen leader, exploited cracks between the remaining brothers and took control over Dai Viet in 1801, transforming it into a completely different state, [[Dai Nam]].

## References:
[[Vietnam, a New History]]
Tags: #history/asia/southeast/vietnam  #time/medieval-era #time/renaissance-era #polity #monarchy
7-1-2022
Status: #status/unrefined 