# Deng Xiaoping

## Personality
Commanding, feisty, energetic, and level-headed, Deng Xiaoping commanded respect inside and outside of China. While not naive, representatives of other countries felt like they could rely on Deng and do business with him. He was studious from childhood, and had a talent for memorizing large amounts of information. As well, having lived in France (5 years) and the Soviet Union (1 year), Deng Xiaoping had a far more international outlook on China than [[Mao Zedong]]. He gained initial respect in the [[Chinese Communist Party]] by volunteering in the French branch under [[Zhou Enlai]], and later served in the [[Chinese Civil War]] as a political commissar under Mao . Throughout this experience, Deng Xiaoping was entrusted to carry out theory, rather than theorize, an approach which would characterize his rule. Finally, he was committed to country over family, never even seeing his parents after leaving the country at 16.

## Early Life
Receiving a relatively privileged education and studying abroad, Deng Xiaoping was influenced patriotically and toward Communism from his time in France. Quickly rising in leadership in the nascent [[Chinese Communist Party]], he was sent to work Shanxi to prepare for future confrontations with the [[Guomindang]]. There, he gained closer connections with Mao Zedong, rising from mere military commander to provincial leadership and eventual control over the 500,000 soldiers against the nationalist army. After the war, Deng Xiaoping developed the Southwest Bureau before taking posts as General Secretary of the CCP and Finance Minister. There, he solidified relationships with the Soviet Union, took an active role in the [[Sino-Soviet Split]], and oversaw key actions in the [[Great Leap Forward]]. These events, alongside earlier exposure to the pro-private enterprise and foreign investment Soviet [[New Economic Policy]] influenced Deng Xiaoping to believe that adoption of some markets positively impacts the country. However, after aligning too closely with Liu Shaoqi, who allowed criticism of Mao's Great Leap Forward, Deng Xiaoping was officially put under house arrest.

## Rise to Power
After a moderately strict punishment, during which Deng's son was permanently injured and the [[Cultural Revolution]] openly targeted Deng's family and former allies, Deng gained conviction that China deeply needed reform. Mao saw Deng Xiaoping and Lin Biao as his two most competent successors in the 1950s and 1960s, and, while originally intending Lin Biao to be his successor, Mao's relationship soured and Lin Biao died in a plane crash. Zhou Enlai then gained most power in the country and handled diplomatic relations with the West. However, Mao saw Zhou Enlai as too soft on the US. Deng Xiaoping was reinstated under Zhou Enlai, and also competed against Wang Hongweng, a young, pro-Mao rebel. As Mao's opinion of Zhou Enlai wained, Wang Hongweng and the "Group of Four" gained even more power. However, Deng Xiaoping gained crucial diplomatic and military roles, a show of Mao's trust. There Deng gave China's first speech to the UN as a member of the Security Council, outlining a policy of unity between the second and third worlds against the USA and USSR. A leadership squabble for the first vice-premier of the State Council ensued, with Wang Hongwen and Jiang Qing among others opposing Deng. This, however, made Mao suspicious of them instead of Deng. 
Zhou Enlai and Mao met to appoint key leadership positions in December 1974 due to both of their key illnesses. While Wang Hongwen was technically number 3 in power, Deng Xiaoping wielded far more real control. In this new seat of power, Deng Xiaoping succesfully implemented the "three directives" which saught to improve the economy while placating Mao. He saught to consolidate government ministries by fighting against factionalism and bureaucracy to increase results. This was even more difficult due to economic underpreformance and absence of competent leaders who were removed in the campaign to criticize Lin Biao and Confucius. 
While improving the educational system, Deng's crucial first step was to appoint competent leaders who would in turn themselves appoint competent leaders. Deng Xiaoping's first goal was to streamline the military, succesfully downsizing it by 1.6 million soldiers including 600,000 officers, and focusing more on new technology. He also created a model for revitilization of failing government programs in the Xuzhou Railway Junction. By fighting rebel leaders and reorganizing key positions he nearly doubled rail traffic. This model was extended to other rail stations and the crucial coal and steel industries, both of which saw growth in 1975. [[Jiangsu]] and [[Zhejiang]] both underpreformed in 1974 amidst economic growth, and Mao, living in Huizhou, Zhejiang province saw special need to focus on these provinces. While they recovered, they also were the key focus of Wang Hongwen, who never regained Beijing leadership positions. As well, the Gang of Four were officially criticized by Mao and Zhou in their last meeting together in 1975, and Deng made Jiang Qing preform a self-criticism as chair of a Politburo meeting in June 1975. He also officially visited France in May 1975, seeing industrialization (in which he realized China was stagnating after visiting local factories) and close ties to Europe as crucial goals.
As China's institutions were weakened by the Cultural Revolution, Deng had a wide amount of power to change them. Zhou advised Deng to tackle issues slowly, and Deng took an approach that, while maintaining a veneer of Maoism, deemphasized the Revolution and instead sought sober, effective leadership. Deng created the Political Research group as a quasi-cabinet of writers for himself, which Mao approved (with the caviat that the Gang of Four maintained control of propaganda, as a counterweight). Deng created an economic plan, including the Twenty Articles on Industry, which saw agriculture and operational discipline as key priorities. These plans, alongside two others, were labeled the "Three Poisonous Weeds" by the Go4. Deng also revitalized the Chinese Academy of Sciences alongside Hu Yaobang, which allowed researchers to access foreign research and reappointed competent, non-military leadership. This was seen as an attempt to support 
Mao's proported "Four Modernizations" of Agriculture, Industry, Defence, and Technology. Deng also lead a mini [[Anti-Rightist Campaign#Hundred Flowers Campaign|Hundred Flowers Campaign]] to support the arts; while some films were blocked by the Go4's Ministry of Culture Mao explicitly vetoed them and allowed for more artistic expression. Deng also sought to revitalize China's universities to Western standards, but did not accomplish this task while Mao lived. Mao was worried about Deng's support of his legacy, in particular the Cultural Revolution, likining him to [[Water Margin]]'s Song Jiang, a rebel who lost his zeal. However, when Deng sought to revitalize Tsinghua University, seen as a model institution by Mao, his relationship quickly deteorated. Mao replaced his "two ladies," his messangers, with explicitly anti-Deng Mao Yuanxin (his nephew). Yuanxin saw Deng's ambivalence toward the Cultural Revolution as a greater threat than even the initial Rightist movement. In November 1975, Mao criticized Deng's handeling of Tsinghua, but repeated his support of his policies. However, after a meeting with Yuanxin, Mao completely turned against Deng. The Pulitburo began denouncing those close to Deng, and Deng was pressured to publically support the Cultural Revolution. Deng offered for Wang Hongwen to replace him as chair of party conferences, but instead he often was forced to chair over meetings in which he was openly criticized. However, seeing the Cultural Revolution as a poor model for development, Deng would never support it in open. He underwent two "self-criticisms" in December 1975 and January 1976 which both were de-facto defences of his policy. After Zhou Enlai's death, Deng was replaced officially by Hua Guofeng. While his reforms paused, Deng was still highly popular in many ranks of government, and his reforms were not undone.
After the death of Zhou, there was mass public outcry at Mao's refusal to honor him with the reverence they deemed appropriate. Ceremonies were brief, and little information was published in the obituary, which was unusual for a person of Zhou Enlai's stature. Deng resigned after Zhou's funeral, and [[Hua Guofeng]] was named a successor as a footnote to an article. Deng remained out of work until the Summer of 1977. [[Jiang Qing]] dubbed Deng a fascist, but these criticisms were curtailed by Mao, who allowed Deng to remain in the party and comforted Deng when Mao neared death. The outcry from Zhou's treatment became a wider movement praising Deng and decrying the Gang of Four (and thus Mao); over a million protestors marched on Tiananmen and military force was used to curtail these protests, which were ween as an omen of Mao's future reputation. Deng was still excluded from public ceremonies, including Mao's funeral after his death in October 7. The Gang of Four was arrested afterwords, removing a crucial enemy.
Hua Guofeng was a mild-mannered, cautious leader. Picked due to being a relatively competent and inoffensive successor to Mao, he had a side of being a true reformer. He, not Deng, instituted the [[Special Economic Zones]] and was as zealous as Deng for foreign technology. Hua and his allies sought to build a personality cult which largely failed, and Hua's policy of the Two Whatevers (whatever Mao's policy and whatever Mao's instructions they should be followed) served to place him as a successor to Mao's legacy, not a usurper. 
Deng, while seen as a crucial leader and being supported to return to government by many crucial officers, was forced to continue self-critism by Hua Guofeng upon his entrance to power. Marshal Ye found that the Gang of Four unfairly blamed Deng for the April 5 Tiananmen demonstrations and thus it was clear by January 1978 that Deng would return to some power. Within the government, senior officials who were victimized by the [[Cultural Revolution]] continually gained power, and they, by in large, supported Deng. Deng steadfastly resisted the Two Whatevers of Hua, but was eventually reinstated, formally in the July Plenum of 1977, upon writing a letter backing Hua's leadership. 
Deng was to return to all his former positions, but put particular emphasis on science and education, to both not interfere with Hua's work but also because he believed it to be the most important of the Four Modernizations and still a field which was controversial. Deng initially wanted less work, but upon seeing the state of Chinese science, which he called two decades behind that of the United States, he micromanaged policy in the field. Despite Deng's role in the [[Anti-Rightist Campaign]], he would never attack intellectuals again, seeing them not as bourgeois but instead as a force of production. 
In 1977, an education conference sought to follow [[Cultural Revolution]] education policy. In response, Deng completely revitalized China's system. He both welcomed foreign study and allowed Chinese scientists abroad to return with compensation or give lectures. He sought to reform the leadership structure of universities so that scientists did not have to work at research institutes, unseating propaganda teams and instating scientific leaders and those to ensure that scientists had proper living conditions. He also prioritized theoreticians versus technicians.
Deng also sought to remove corruption in university entrance, reinstating the [[Gaokao]]. Instead of an opaque system of party-leader recommendations, Deng removed that system within weeks of 1977 and forced the administration of exams, causing universities to open late. He also allowed for students to be enrolled directly out of high school, not needing to perform labor instead. He prioritized expertise instead of party loyalty. While university curricula were rushed and materials were old, this was a true reform in education, and the impacts of Deng's educational reforms can be seen to this day.
Deng also founded the Chinese Association for Social Sciences as a separate branch, allowing for far more freedom of thought than would be otherwise had. He founded the Central Party School for officials, which educated a progressive branch of thinkers. These students would interact with their high level officer professors which injected creative new ideas into the party. The journal of the school, _Theoretical Trends_, was noteworthy as it was far more progressive than most, and an influential article “Practice Is the Sole Criterion for Judging Truth” argued that the social experience of the people was the only way to gauge truth, and thus Marxism should be morphed due to experience. If Maoism and Marxism fail, replace their ideas. Due to regulations regarding this journal, the paper was published in newspapers without the consent of the propaganda minister Wang Dongxing, galvanising the government into those who supported Hua's Two Whatevers and benefitted from the Cultural Revolution and those who supported the Deng-aligned "Practice" and were persecuted in it.
Deng Xiaoping also, at the time, had substantial control over the military due to his role as Chief of the General Staff and his relationship with high-ranking officers.
In the atmosphere of reform, Deng supported high-level expeditions to foreign countries, including Gu Mu's pivotal trip to understand Western Europe. This incident added to Deng's conviction that China was, at the time, backward. Deng started by allowing cloth imports to boost China's textile industry and supporting the predecessor to the [[Shenzhen]] [[Special Economic Zones|Special Economic Zone]]. Deng Xiaoping closely followed, but did not attend due to his work on science, the The Forum on Principles to Guide the Four Modernizations which summarized and discussed the points raised in the report of the trip. There, Li Xiannian, the paramount leader in economics, stated that China could no longer remain closed to foreign business and trade.
Deng visited the Northeast in order to campaign for "Practice" and to react to Hua's sending of a propaganda minister there to boost the Two Whatevers. Deng also took the time to shore up military support. Deng spoke openly about how Maoism succeeded by adapting to China's positions at the time and how China should not follow the lead of the [[Soviet Union]], both pretexts to eclipse Hua.
The Central Party Work Conference, originally convened by Hua to discuss agriculture, quickly devolved into broader discontent with Hua's 2 Whatevers, veto of pardons for Cultural Revolution targets, and reaction to the April 5th incident. Deng more directly attacked these ideas in the wake of a more favorable political atmosphere. Among other things, Mao was indirectly blamed for the [[Great Leap Forward]], and some groups openly supported "Practice". Deng, along with Chen Yun, gained tremendous amounts of power, and the latter's position to manage personnel and the economy led to the pair gaining a plurality of the power. Upon returning from Southeast Asia, Deng was briefed by Marshal Ye, where he agreed to take control of communications and to not rule as a dictator. Deng's speech at the end of a work conference was one of the most important he ever made. Deng sought to outline the extent to which he would allow freedom, depart from Maoism, how he would ensure stability among other factors. Rather than set policy, it was meant to show how he would rule. He announced that he intended to allow the masses to offer criticism and for intra-party democracy to flourish. He stated that Mao made mistakes but provided guidance, and that a legal system would ensure that one man could not make such mistakes again. He encouraged autonomous decision making among experts as well. This speech was a seminal moment of hope that the tragedies of Maoism might finally end.
The Third Plenum was a continuation of this state of affairs. While Hua maintained his roles, Deng became leader without any formal recognition of such. The covertness of the transfer was to hide the fact that such a power struggle was ever taking place.  While Deng was more powerful, Hua still had allies and, had Deng overextended himself, Ye and Xiannian would not have taken kindly to another dictatorship.

## Deng's Early Rule
In 1978, 2 forces advanced [[Democracy in China]] more than anything since the 100 Flowers Campaign. The Democracy Wall was an outpouring of public sentiment for greater speech and for justice after the Cultural Revolution. Deng originally supported it, as it had criticized Hua's rule for his public errors, and in January 1979 explicitly stated that he wished to see more speech in China. However, as messages began to shift to being anti-CCP, Deng elected not to give a prepared speech in support of the wall. After the city of Beijing outlawed public anti-socialist materials, Deng had a spokesperson of the democracy movement, Wei Jingsheng, arrested. 
[[Marshal Ye]] convened the Conference on Theoretic Principles in order to create a unified ideology of the party. The conference, expectedly, stated support for the modernizations and criticized Hua's Whatevers, forcing former supporters to criticize themselves. Speakers at the conference were motivated by the same spirit as the Democracy Wall, and some high-level officials, including Li Xiannian and Chen Yun, saw these sentiments as going too far.
Deng had to strike a balance between allowing speech in China, which was a demand of the intellectual class, and maintaining stability. He created a clear guideline for unacceptable speech, namely that writings could not challenge socialism, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the leadership of the CCP, or [[Marxism-Leninism]] and Maoism. While Mao was fallible, he was also the representation of the revolution and must be respected. Deng soured on open speech, eventually removing Hu Yaobang from his position as propaganda minster in 1987.  The balance between free speech and control eventually spiralled into the tragedy at Tiananmen.
Deng Xiaoping, starting in 1978, went on an expansive world tour in order to signal China's new openness to foreign ideas and to increase its involvement in world affairs. Deng Xiaoping, due to his experience under Mao and Zhou, was the most prepared to lead Chinese foreign policy, having the confidence to interact with foreign leaders as equals. Beginning in 1969, the USSR replaced the US as China's paramount foe. Deng wished to isolate the USSR from its allies and gain allies against them, and crucially their client state of Vietnam.
Deng Xiaoping had close ties to Vietnam since his days in France, and so saw the Vietnamese turn toward the USSR as a betrayal. While China supported Ho Chi Minh in the war, their lack of support for independence in 1954 and China's turn to the US meant that Vietnam relied more and more on the USSR, especially after Deng Xiaoping was sacked while presiding over some Vietnamese aid which was removed during the Gang of Four's ideologically stringent rule. Deng came to power at a time when Vietnam was firmly a Soviet ally, and recognized its persecution of ethnic Chinese and deep military ties as signals that it was China's [[Cuba]]; a military outpost for the Soviets. Especially since India and the Soviets surrounded China, allies were needed on the frontier. China's support of [[Cambodia]] and the [[Khmer Rouge]] meant that Vietnamese hegemony over Southeast Asia was especially unacceptable. 
Deng started by visiting Burma and Nepal, two relatively pro-China states due to their isolation from the international community and India respectively. Deng also went to [[North Korea]], which, despite having reasons to turn to the USSR due to China's tilt toward Japan and the US, had [[Kim Il Sung]] reemphasize his ties with China and Deng.
During the beginning of the Central Party Work Conference, Deng instead visited Southeast Asia amidst further Vietnamese bombings and an imminent invasion of Cambodia. Vietnamese hegemony was seen as regrettable but inevitable by ASEAN, and some countries, especially Malaysia and Indonesia, were more outraged at Chinese support of local Communist insurgencies, including broadcasting radio in support of armed revolutions aimed at their ethnic Chinese populations.
Deng first visited [[Thailand]]. Although Deng also supported the Thai Communist Party, the Chinese population there was better integrated and Thailand's pro-Western stance made finding common ground easier. Deng supported ASEAN being a neutral ground and stopped radio broadcasts in 1979, in exchange Thailand normalized relations with Cambodia.
Malaysia was a harder sell. Malaysia had expelled [[Singapore]] due to their high Chinese populations amidst fear of a Communist revolution post-independence. China promised to end the broadcasts, which they did in 1981, but, unlike Vietnam, refused to rebuke the insurgency there.
Deng's visit to Singapore led to a long-standing understanding between Deng and [[Lee Kuan Yew]]. Lee was a highly educated, pragmatic capitalist, and despite being ethnically Chinese did not fluently speak the language. Deng expressed the Soviet threat with urgency, and Lee ensured Deng that Singapore had few ties to the USSR. Still, he surprised Deng by stating that the majority of ASEAN was more concerned over Chinese revolutionary rhetoric than Vietnam. Deng gained Lee's respect by thoughtfully considering this point, and, even though he did not change course immediately due to a fear of abandoning long-standing allies, showed an openness to changing his mind. Deng had visited Singapore in the 1920s, and so Singapore's economic miracle was clear proof that modernization was possible and desirable. A highly ordered state with foreign capital made Deng support his economic plans even more.
Deng also helped relations with Chinese abroad. Some were persecuted to the point where they still harbored resentment, some saw opportunity in opening up. Some of those persecuted regained their homes or were compensated monetarily or through education. The [[Chinese Communist Party]] was not a party of revolution any longer, and thus Deng saw it necessary to stop the revolutionary broadcasts.
Deng, when presented with a problem, first understood the root issues. He would individually tackle new problems created by his approach. In order to counter Vietnam, he would need Southeast Asian allies, to get these allies he needed to stop supporting local communists. In order to modernize and further contain the USSR, he would turn to Japan and the US.
Japan, having transformed from a closed economy in World War 2 to a remarkably successful market economy, was an obvious role model for China. As well, China was seeking allies in the midst of the Vietnamese-Cambodian escalation. Deng was working against decades of Chinese resentment against Japanese colonization and war-crimes, but Deng, having fought against the Japanese, had the requisite goodwill to tackle the problem. While China and Japan disagreed when negotiating a foundation treaty for their diplomacy, Deng relented from requiring both countries to resist any hegemony in the region, which would have alienated Japan further from the USSR. In the midst of success, Deng visited the country to improve relations and modernization.
Deng's visit to Japan left a huge mark on the country. Having hosted Japanese diplomats in the past, Deng returned the goodwill, and was met by politicians and even the emperor who expressed subtle regret at Japanese hostility and crimes against the Japanese people. Deng, meanwhile, expressed that China was, at the moment, backwards, and needed to learn from Japanese modernization (the student and the teacher being reversed from history). After a company-hosted dinner, Deng skillfully responded to controversial questions ranging from the [[Senkaku Island Dispute]] to the [[Cultural Revolution]] in the first press-conference ever given by a major Chinese leader. Deng learned that modern capitalist countries were not exploiting workers, but instead provided far better incentives then he would have thought. Deng introduced the idea of management in his own thinking, and his idea of socialism with good management let him use neutral terminology to push pro-west ideas.
Deng's reopening to the US was motivated by the same two drives as his opening with Japan, modernization and containment of the Soviets. After Nixon's visit to China in 1972, Deng was surprised how US political infighting meant that normalization of relations moved at a glacial pace. Deng met with [[Cyrus Vance]], US foreign secretary, 3 days after being reinstated to the Politburo, a sign of this issue's importance. Deng was willing to bend on many issues, but drew a hard line on recognition and support of [[Taiwan]]. Initially, Carter urged Vance to postpone serious negotiation due to controversial the Panama Canal Treaties and Vance's hope of success in the SALT talks. Adding another politically fraught compromise could anger both the American public and Soviet regime. [[Huang Hua]], the foreign minister, was furious at Vance, covertly threatening war with Taiwan and backing a more stridently anti-Soviet American foreign policy. Vance was replaced by more anti-Soviet Zbigniew Brzezinski, a national security adviser, and Woodcock for true negotiations. Brzezinski traveled to China for talks immediately after the Panama Canal Treaties were passed. After talks, Deng succeeded in coming to an agreement for normalization, while he would allow commercial and cultural ties with Taiwan the US would renounce formal recognition, and China would exchange students with the US. The US negotiations were kept highly secret and were expedited for fear of a leak. On the last day, Woodcock met with Deng multiple times, and provoked his fury and possible derailment of talks by confirming that the US would not cease the arms trade with Taiwan. Seeing these negotiations as a seminal accomplishment and key step towards better management, Deng relented. In doing so, he sacrificed the ideas of Taiwanese reunification with normalization of relations. The news was met with near unanimous support, except, of course, in Taiwan.
Deng visited the US in January-February of 1979. Beyond the visit of Khrushchev, Deng's visit was possibly the most curiosity-provoking by a foreign leader to the American public. While, of course, there were some protestors, the general mood was one of interest and goodwill, of peace between nations. Carter met Deng at a time of failure in the Middle East and deep personal unpopularity. Deng and US representatives made key progress in student exchanges, trade, US tacit support of China's strike on Vietnam, and US worries about lack of freedom of warship, the press, and missionary activity. Atlanta was one of the four cities visited, and was seen as a symbol of transformation from poverty to modernity, something that Deng hoped to accomplish.
This visit both inspired overconfidence in America and China. Chinese televisions beamed with visions of a modern America, and this spark lit the fire of revolution guided by those who wished to adopt a more American way of life. While China looked outward, Deng would never again leave China's borders in his last 18 years of life after these 15 months of 5 trips.
Deng's position in 1978 saw him with a clear path to becoming the paramount leader, but Deng did not yet have a team with which to carry out his Four Modernizations. While hoping to clear out Hua's camp with modernizers, enough Maoists still had influence that he had to be moderate in his approach. Deng, sensing that his urban support was higher than rural, refrained from criticising Mao or Hua outright, and instead focused on Lin Biao, the Gang of Four, and the Two Whatevers as policy. Deng climbed a mountain in Northern China, much like Mao swam in the Yangtze, to show vitality to create this new group of builders. This was the first round of cabinet building where merit truly outstripped ideology, and, except for military and personal posts, Deng favored those with formal qualifications over loyal members. 
Deng was forced into maintaining the status of [[Chen Yun]] and [[Li Xiannian]] as they were both influential enough to be impossible to remove. Beyond them, Deng tapped Chinese Academy of Sciences reformist leader [[Hu Yaobang]] for party roles, Shenzhen industry reformer Zhao Ziyang for government roles, and Wang Li, former railroad comissioner among other roles for agriculture. Deng Liqun was put into propaganda and Hu Qiumao kept an orthodox Maoist voice.
Deng's government faced the problem that, in the wake of the Cultural Revolution, there were few young, educated party members able to take up future governance. Thus, although senior officials could rise to the occasion, Deng was dedicated to improving the middle and lower levels of leadership with younger candidates who, while not immediately put into positions of power, were given mentorship by their superiors and were able to rise when able to display competence. Deng encouraged neutral, militarily respected [[Marshal Ye]] to give a speech tacitly denouncing Maoist legacy in the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution, the first major statement against Maoism by such an official. The success of this speech showed Deng the feasibility of a wider critique of Maoist history, which he undertook alongside [[Hu Yaobang|Hu]].
As Deng gained more power, more liberal writers felt more compelled to talk critically about Maoist influence. These efforts went too far for Deng. While Deng wished to view the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolutions as mistakes, he also viewed the primary purpose of the history as being the praise of Maoist thought for the sake of unity, which Hu privately disagreed with. In order to discredit ideas of demaoization, Deng undertook a successful interview with an Italian journalist stating that, while the Cultural Revolution and Great Leap Forward were mistakes, that Mao was generally right and only acted against his ideology in older age. Deng also thought that Mao's mistake in appointing Lin Biao as successor was feudal, a tool to discredit Hua as well.
Deng made an important address laying out his nascent government's priorities in January 1980, stating that, in order to prove socialism's superiority, growth and good management were paramount. Deng also spoke against freedom of the press, speech, and assembly when used in counter-revolutionary ways while allowing intra-party democracy and artistic expression. He was careful to set more limited targets so as to not disappoint the Chinese people, hoping to quadruple GNP by 2000. These principles, alongside other Deng staples, formed the bedrock of his ideology for his entire rule.
The fifth plenum in February 1980 was functionally Deng's inauguration. Hua allies such as Wang Dongxing were removed, and Hu and Zhao gained their formal roles. Hua retained nominal power but was functionally sidelined until his formal removal in 1981. Deng also cleared the name of his late friend Liu Shaoqi and moved away from collective agriculture. At this point, Deng was the undisputed paramount leader of China.

## Deng Administration
Deng's style of rule diverged sharply from Mao's. Children did not memorize his quotes in school and he did not force his picture to be displayed in public. Even though Deng did not have the top titles in China, only being vice-president of the party, vice premier, and chairman of the Central Military Commission, Deng was able to wield power as the paramount leader. Deng ruled from closer to the ground than Mao, rather than pass down edicts he was more focused on building the staff and systems needed to develop. Deng's actual working style was influenced by profound hearing loss, instead of attending meetings he would rely on documents to be read or revised. Toward the end of his rule, he also tended to give less complex speeches. Deng heavily leaned on his personal secretary, Wang Ruilin, in order to convey his thoughts in meetings and report to him, which Wang did faithfully. Both [[Hu Yaobang]] and Zhao Ziyang would forward appropriate work to Deng for final approval, but Deng rarely micromanaged. Deng had to work with the atmosphere of the Politburo, and would occasionally trample over some area experts, like Chen Yun in economics or Marshall Ye in military affairs. Deng rarely called the standing committee of the Politburo, and Deng created a parallel structure of power, the Party Secretariat, to act like an inner cabinet. Deng paid close attention to major party conferences in order to unify the party to follow his principles, and under Deng's reign the party was relatively disciplined. Deng both believed in "Interparty Democracy," which advocated for dissenting views within the party to be heard, and "Democratic Centralization," which meant that when a consensus on an issue was reached no dissonance was tolerated. Deng was formal to Hu and Zhao, and so relied on older friends to get a truer sense of the feelings of the party. 
Deng believed in the authority of the party to unify the country. Authority could instill rule of law in a country that was desensitized to the law, seeing it changed so many times before. He also believed in maintaining his own authority, occasionally using lower members as scapegoats for problems to take the blame. Deng tried to build popular consensus before reform and would push radical changes slowly in order to let more conservative party members come to terms with reform. Deng believed in quick action even if all details were not known. He would try to get honest facts and run experiments to try new policy. In all, he balanced maintaining unquestioned rule with popular governance and advocated for the country before associates.

## References:
[[Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China]], Ezra F. Vogel (Bulk of note if not mentioned)

Tags: #asia/china #history/asia/china #politics/china #world-leaders/asia/china #communism #time/modern-era/1900s
20-12-2021
Status: #status/draft 