# Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China

## Introduction
[[Deng Xiaoping]] inherited [[China]] at a time of crisis (1978). After [[Mao Zedong]]'s rule, the average peasant earned $40 a year and grain production was lower than at 1957 levels due to the [[Great Leap Forward]]. As opposed to Mao's isolationism, Deng Xiaoping opened the country's economy, but not immediately. Instead, he encouraged a gradual implementation of new ideas to see what worked and what didn't, in order to create a system tailored to China's unique situation. In short, instead of single-handedly creating new ideas for China, he saw his role to oversee the transition from a closed system of governance to an open one, to manage expectations and bring stability, and to find reputable people to manage the transition. There is a parallel between this transformation of China and the [[Meiji Revolution]] of Japan, both gradual adoptions of foreign ideas in order to [[Asian Modernization|modernize]] the respective countries. China, after a military defeat from Japan in 1898, tried to adopt Western customs drastically and failed; Deng took the long approach.

## From Revolutionary to Builder to Reformer
Deng Xiaoping (born 1904) was actively supported by his family in education, possibly hoping that he would become an official, a system abolished completely by the time Deng reached the age of 7. He successfully completed Confucian-oriented education, earning a scholarship to study in France and participating in patriotic events even in his teenage years. 
Racism against Asians in France deeply affected Deng. Deng's French program shut down due to post-WW1 inflation and he found unskilled local work instead. The betrayal of the Chinese and French governments caused radicalization among the students, causing an initial shift toward Communism. The [[Chinese Communist Party]] was only founded in July 1921, but Deng Xiaoping joined a nascent French branch in 1922, and quickly rose to be a leader of both this branch and the [[Guomindang]] in Europe by 1925 (at a time when the CCP had less than 1000 members total). French members would end up having an outsize influence on the CCP as a whole, having a future premier [[Zhou Enlai]] alongside leading economic planners, foreign affairs leaders, scientific planners, and propagandists. After living in France, he escaped to Russia and studied Marxist ideology at Sun-Yat Sen University. The [[New Economic Policy]] of the Soviet Union, allowing limited private enterprise and foreign investment, was successful at the time of Deng's studies, influencing some pro-Capitalist beliefs.
After studying for a year, Deng was sent to [[Shanxi]] to prepare (via underground operations) for potential Civil War against the Guomindang, there meeting [[Mao Zedong]]. He then successfully established a base of power with warlords in [[Guangxi]], before this falling catastrophically. His wife died then during pregnancy, along with the infant; Deng immediately went back to work. In Jiangxi, Deng increased his popularity and became closer to Mao Zedong, before being removed from head of Hui-chang county due to passivity in attacking enemy troops (dubbed "Deng's First Fall"). Deng's second wife then left him and married one of his accusers. Deng was in charge of propaganda during the [[Long March]], and had some military involvement partnered with Liu Bocheng in the Sino-Japanese War. He also married his wife with whom he will stay for the rest of his life. In the renewed Civil War, Deng was tolerant of losses and fought decisive battles, gaining control over areas of the Central Plain, and later gained control over the entire front of 500,000 soldiers.
After war, Deng Xiaoping became first secretary of the Southwest Bureau, representing 100 million people, thereby in charge of pacifying the area and developing it. This area was the historical headquarters of the Guomindang, and so had more resistance than most to Communist rule. He sponsored a railway between Chongqing and Chengdu and delegated capable officers from his Second Field Army to lead projects. In 1953 he was made finance minister, and in 1956, he was made General Secretary of the CCP, both times delegated by Mao. Deng, for instance, was the first Chinese delegate to read [[Nikita Khrushchev]]'s [[Secret Speech]], passing this crucial information to Mao. As General Secretary, he was one of the top 6 members of the party. In Mao's [[Anti-Rightist Campaign]], Deng Xiaoping suppressed dissident intellectuals who criticized Maoism, which harmed Deng Xiaoping's relationship with China's intellectual elite for his entire career. Deng Xiaoping apparently regretted rarely openly criticizing Mao, and saw that he let Mao make too many errors. Deng carried out Mao's plan in the [[Great Leap Forward]] until 1959, but then adjusted Mao's plans for the GLF to be more realistic and moderate (1960-1). Despite this, Mao was still supportive of Deng's role in the [[Sino-Soviet Split]]. However, after Deng's continued friendship with Liu Shaoqi (formerly Mao's designated successor) who allowed public criticism of the GLF, Deng Xiaoping was also attacked and put under house arrest, a punishment lighter than most. Some say Mao was keeping Deng Xiaoping for use in a future time.

## Deng's Tortuous Road to the Top

## Banishment and Return
In 1969, Deng was to be educated in [[Maoism]]. This punishment was limited, while not able to speak to Mao he was presumably able to contact him through writing and Deng remained a party member. This isolation allowed Deng to formulate ideas about long-term, national goals, and solidified his conviction that China needed deep changes. Deng Xiaoping's son Deng Pufang became severely injured for life, disabling and forcing Deng to care for him. At this time, Deng Xiaoping turned against the [[Cultural Revolution]] and clearly saw that China needed to heal from it. While Deng still idolized Mao, he also personally saw the effects of these policies, those that injured his son and left all of his children under constant attack from the Red Guards. At the time, Deng was seen as Mao's Khrushchev, and Deng contemplated how to transition away from Maoist ideology while maintaining trust in the CCP. The [[Brezhnev Doctrine]] of allowing open military intervention in non-compliant communist countries forced China to look abroad for support during their rift with the USSR. In 1970 China normalized relations with Canada, in 1971 China joined the UN in place of Taiwan, and in 1972 [[Richard Nixon]] visited China in official capacity.
Formerly, in the 1950s and 60s, Mao saw Deng Xiaoping and [[Lin Biao]] as his two most promising successors, leading to conflict between the two. In 1966, Mao officially selected Lin, who had refused the position many times before, as his "Comrade in Arms." Beginning in 1971, Mao began to push Lin aside for fears that Lin was trying to usurp him, and in September 12 Lin Biao's plane crashed, killing him and his family. Now, Mao, who was gravely ill, allowed others greater decision making capacity and created a leadership structure of senior officials, many of whom were victims of the Cultural Revolution. Of the 5 members of the [[Politburo]] Standing Committee in 1970, only Deng and [[Zhou Enlai]] survived. Zhou then took control over most government and party structure. Zhou reportedly was distraught at the news of Lin's death, respecting Lin, fearing for stability, and distrusting Mao now that he was the second in command. In a memorial service for a deceased admiral, Mao Zedong publicly made amends with some high-profile victims of the Cultural Revolution. Zhou Enlai was also diagnosed with cancer in 1972, and continued to work despite the illness. Zhou Enlai had a large swath of control, and convinced Mao to reinstate Deng in December 1972. Zhou met [[Henry Kissinger]] in 1971, earning his respect.
Deng Xiaoping was officially restated in February 1973, and flattered Mao in order to regain influence in the party. Mao stated that Lin Biao mistreated Deng Xiaoping, which was official justification for his reinstatement. While some opposed giving Deng a major role in the party, Deng Xiaoping was put in the leadership group under Zhou Enlai, before quickly becoming vice-premier and involving himself with foreign policy with minimal autonomy. Meanwhile, Mao also saw Wang Hongweng, a young, fiercely loyal rebel with a working-class background, as a potential future party leader. Mao retreated to his private world, mostly keeping informed with a circle of three women close to him. Mao did not especially like Zhou Enlai and was paranoid that Zhou would erase much of Mao's legacy, but relied on him due to Zhou's prowess in government activities. Mao did not want Zhou's legacy to eclipse his, and so sought to erode Zhou's influence and reputation; Deng was a potential tool to replace some of Zhou's roles.
During the 10th Party Congress, Wang Hongweng gained a substantial amount of power and given power to nominate members of the Central Committee; this was protested by many senior members. Meanwhile, Deng was maintained in the Committee but was given no leadership. The return of members criticized in the Cultural Revolution created a foundation of support for Deng to come. After the Congress, Mao's opinion of Zhou Enlai continued to sour, seeing Zhou as too pro-US. Zhou lost most power in negotiating with the US after insufficiently criticizing the USA's growing relationship with Taiwan in 1973. Deng Xiaoping harshly criticized Zhou Enlai in December 1973, with whom he had a relationship from his studies in France, regaining Mao's trust in the process. Deng then represented China to the UN in May 1974 and later hosted visits with foreign dignitaries. He also took control over some military roles in order to keep generals in check, shoring control over the army. Mao also started to fear the radical members of the Politburo (the "Gang of Four", including Wang Hongweng).
Deng Xiaoping was entrusted to make the first Chinese address to the UN since it supplanted Taiwan in the Security Council. Deng was seen as the only sufficiently tough and experienced leader to stand up to the USA. He stipulated Mao's theory of China leading the second and third worlds against the developed Soviet Union and USA. Later, Deng and Kissinger met for the first time, and Deng bluntly embodied this tough-on-America ideology as Zhou's replacement. These 1974 meetings were more reserved than those after Mao's death in 1978, and Deng was noticeably still ignorant of some world issues. While meeting all world leaders, Deng was particularly interested in Japan due to its successful westernization. In mid 1974, Mao ended the Cultural Revolution due to its effects on the economy harming his reputation. Deng then became first vice-premier of the State Council. Wang Hongwen opposed this and instead backed a different candidate, but eventually relented and appointed Deng. [[Jiang Qing]], a woman close to Mao, opposed Deng for the position, and her relationship with Mao soured. Conflicts between the two led to Wang Hongwen asking Mao to reconsider Deng's leadership, which backfired and made Mao even more suspicious of Wang. While not dismissing Jiang, Mao pushed her aside.

## Bringing Order under Mao
In December 1974, Zhou Enlai met with Mao to discuss leadership positions as both were very sick at the time and could hardly carry on their work. Wang Hongwen also joined in these talks. Mao and Zhou were both most concerned about stability and unity, and selected experienced leaders. Wang Hongwen remained first vice chairman, and Deng Xiaoping gained control of government work. Deng and Wang were both formally top leaders, but could be replaced anytime by Mao. Wang Hongwen was confirmed as first vice chairman of the Central Committee, then third in power, and Deng Xiaoping became vice premier in January 1975. Wang was personally loyal to Mao and the revolution, whereas Deng was a competent foreign affairs expert and knew how government works. Deng, due to his experience, had far more real power than Wang, although Wang's higher role and Jiang Qing's propaganda were checks on his influence. After Zhou Enlai's condition further worsened, Deng started officially chairing State Council meetings in February 1975, having full power as long as Mao was placated.
Deng Xiaoping now focused on developing China while placating Mao. To do so, he did not criticize the Cultural Revolution and praised [[Maoism]]. He created the "three directives," all expressions used by Mao, to further his relative liberalization. They were to oppose revisionism, promote stability, and strengthen the economy. Factionalism was a crucial issue, with different officials taking petty sides and halting progress. At the time, the economy and agriculture were weak, and the scars of the Cultural Revolution were still open. Education was so weak due to the persecution of intellectuals that these modernization efforts were very difficult. He had a period of "consolidation," (starting in the military) in order to replace leaders who were absent either due to the Cultural Revolution or the mere passage of time. His philosophy was focused on picking competent leaders who could delegate other competent leaders, who would work in a more effective team with significant independence in how they achieved their goals. Deng Xiaoping also tried to improve the education system in order to select leaders off of merit, although it was so decrepit at the time that for the next decade leaders were mostly selected for personal reasons.
Deng Xiaoping's first major step was to streamline the military to stop undergoing civilian roles and to replace inefficient and undisciplined leaders who used their power to gain luxurious conditions during the Cultural Revolution. These reforms were popular from the government. Deng also saw that [[Gerald Ford]] was incapable of realizing the threat of the Soviet Union to the same extent as [[Richard Nixon]] did in Asia, and so Chinese military force had to be preemptively increased. Deng Xiaoping pressed the Americans to take a firmer anti-Soviet stance. Deng Xiaoping's unpopular step in 1975 was to downsize the military, difficult due to the tensions with the USSR, but he was able to decrease the amount of army members by 1.6 million (including 600,000 officers) while keeping technical staff constant. Deng Xiaoping allowed the Gang of Four to keep control of propaganda, but he successfully maintained the power he had gained previously. He also turned attention to increasing the level of technology in the army.
Following Deng's philosophy of fighting small battles to boost morale, Deng Xiaoping focused on the Xuzhou railway junction in [[Jiangsu]] province to help transportation and industry. The head of the Xuzhou Railway Bureau was a rebel, and even occupied municipal offices. Wang Hongwen, a rebel himself, was in charge of defeating rebels. Deng (with Mao) appointed Wan Li, a mastermind in overcoming these sorts of bottlenecks, to become minister of railways in December 1974. Document 9 stated that railway officials were liable to accidents and factions were to be disbanded, and violations of this were punishable. At the time, the rail system was corrupt and disorganized, and so Deng used reasonable plans instead of ideological thought to gain support among the populace and government to create real change. The leader of the Xuzhou Railway Bureau was arrested (along with associates) and Wan Li spoke in support of Document 9. The amount of Xuzhou cars and loaded cars both nearly doubled after these changes. After this success, this plan was seen as a model to reform other railway sections and other industries. Deng particularly focused on Jiangsu and [[Zhejiang]], who were suffering amidst this success due to rampant corruption and factionalism. Coal and steel were the next industries targeted, as they formed the backbone of China's industry. These problems were more pressing due to the recovery of China's transportation system, removing that bottleneck. Steel production dropped in 1974 due to the disruptions caused by the Plan to Criticize Lin Biao and [[Confucianism|Confucius]]. Officials in charge of steel were seen to be afraid to make a political mistake as they were criticized in this campaign, and did not want to be seen prioritizing economics before politics. Coal and steel production both successfully increased alongside other crucial goods, although it should be noted that steel production did not meet Deng's ambitious quota in 1975. This was used as a mode of attack on Deng by political rivals. 
In 1974, Zhejiang and Jiangsu were the only two provinces to decrease in production, even more important as Mao moved to Hangzhou, in Zhejiang during this time. Wang Hongwen was unable to solve this Zhejiang problem, and was criticized by Mao in Spring 1975. In June 1975, Wang was appointed to oversee the removal of rebels from Zhejiang. The consolidation in Zhejiang was successfully lead by another competent official, and industrial growth followed. Wang Hongwen never returned to his position in Beijing. Later, Wang was arrested in October 1976, along with the rest of the Gang of Four, and was ironically criticized for being overzealous and overly bold.
As Mao soured on the Gang of Four and Wang Hongwen, he ceded even more power to Deng. Zhou met Mao for the last time, criticizing Jiang Qing and the Gang of Four, and Deng first replaced Wang as chair of a Politburo meeting on June 1975.
Deng also officially visited France in May 1975, the first visit to a Western country and seen as a sign of both Chinese modernization and Deng's growing power over the Gang of Four. His visits to French factories showed him how out of date Chinese industry was.

## Looking Forward Under Mao
Due to the effects of the cultural revolution, Deng's appointment to chair party meetings in 1975 gave him a wide amount of power to fundamentally change the CCP. His early appointments marked an end to Mao's obsession with continuing the "revolution" and a move toward sensible, competent leadership. Deng focused on members who gained experience prior to the Cultural Revolution, thus denying the continued advancement of some less qualified members who were shot up through the ranks during the chaos. As Zhou's condition worsened, he advised Deng to tackle issues one-by-one in order to stay in the graces of Mao. He created a formal department, the Political Research Office, as a sort of think tank (mostly writers) to help him formulate good policy. While early issues were focused on Mao's priorities, Deng was later able to also guide policy on science, technology and industry. He had almost complete control over this department, which functioned as a sort of cabinet for him. Even with this expansion of control, the Gang of Four maintained control over propaganda to ensure that Deng stuck to Maoism, which Jiang Qing used to criticize Deng. In December 1975, when Mao ceased supporting Deng, this office stopped its work, but even in that short five-month time period it successfully promoted education, science, and modernization.
Deng also sought to create an economic plan. In 1975, the Twenty Articles on Industry was compiled, a fundamental plan to support industrial development. Despite the success of the capitalist [[Four Asian Tigers]], these articles saw central planning and Marxism as the solution to economic growth. It sought more sober planning and went against the ideology which created drastic, failed plans such as the Great Leap Forward. This need for fundamental change was clearly understood by Deng, especially due to his visits to Western countries. While the Cultural Revolution was over, praising capitalism was still taboo. So, Deng sought to increase technological imports from other countries in these Twenty Articles. Deng agreed with the Article's point that agricultural growth had to precede industrial, and that machinery should be given to agricultural communes. He wished for those who did dangerous work to get more compensation and to improve operational discipline, and the articles were revised with this commentary. These articles were, predictably, lambasted by the Gang of Four, who saw it as one of the "Three Poisonous Weeds" which Deng supported to encourage materialism. The newly written Five Year and annual plans matched Deng's cautious approach to economic development, changes not matched by the Ten Year Economic Vision.
The Chinese Academy of Sciences was in shambles after the Cultural Revolution, with 1 of 250 members killed during it. Deng appointed [[Hu Yaobang]] to revitalize the institution, who promptly removed workers and military personnel from its ranks, and opened up foreign research to researchers. Hu personally vouched for members of the CAS, to help them return to normal life (he was persecuted in the Cultural Revolution too). He compiled a report supporting increased research in economically important sectors alongside high-technology such as nuclear energy, and justified it using Mao's terminology of "Four Modernizations" (Agriculture, Industry, Defence, Technology). During a speech that Hu gave, Deng interrupted in a rare bout of passion, saying that scientists should learn foreign language and that the government should undo punishments of brilliant scientists. Mao received this very poorly, and saw some of his quotations in the report as fraudulent. Deng also created an academy for the social sciences, whose work would be reviewed by the PRO to ensure that the Gang of Four would not attack it. However, this plan was aborted by Mao in 1976.
In 1975, Mao complained about a lack of new arts, and thought that people were too afraid to make mistakes. This was a mini [[Anti-Rightist Campaign#Hundred Flowers Campaign|Hundred Flowers Campaign]], complete with maintaining the ability of the Gang of Four to censor anti-Mao sentiment. However, new art was produced, and Mao was particularly happy with a particular film lionizing one of his allies which had been blocked by the Gang of Four's Ministry of Culture, a major win for cultural freedom.
Zhou Rongxin, as Deng's education secretary, pushed for the reestablishment of China's decrepit university system, including allowing high schoolers to enter university without 2 years of physical labour. For this, Zhou was heavily criticized and Deng was unable to reform China's educational system while Mao lived.
In Mao's twilight years, he spent less time worrying about governance. Instead, he spent time indulging in literature and the arts. His support of [[Water Margin]] as an allogory of current politics allowed Jiang Qing to criticize Deng as acting like Song Jiang, a former revolutionary who lost his zeal. Deng attempted to restrict this discussion to literary circles, but Mao opened it up. Deng, a bureaucrat, was seen as China's Khruschev, attempting to gain revenge by sullying Mao's reputation. Jiang Qing attempted to use Water Margin to intensify these attacks on Deng, but Mao thought she went too far.
Deng's criticism of Tsinghua University, treasured by Mao, was too far in his eyes. Mao's fraudulent quotation in the Ten Year Vision for the Development of Science, “science and technology constitute a force of production,” was reexamined by Mao at this time. Mao was correct, the author of the report slightly edited Mao's wording. This was seen as a direct attack of the Cultural Revolution itself, not just its effects, leading to more speculation about Mao's legacy under Deng.
Mao saw his "two ladies," his primary connection to the outside world, as too close to Deng. His nephew, Mao Yuanxin, replaced them as his messenger. Yuanxin reported that the critics of the Cultural Revolution were even more outspoken than the critics of ultra-leftism which sparked the movement to criticize Lin Biao and Confucius, and continuously made attempts to undermine Deng.
In November 1975, Mao met with Deng (who wished to speak to him, sensing a deterioration in their relationship). Mao criticized his relationship with Liu Bing, in charge of reforming Tsinghua, but also stated that Deng's policies were correct. Deng left the meeting overestimating Mao's support. After a meeting with Yuanxin, Deng's relationship with Mao took a nosedive. Mao did not meet with Deng in private, attempting to force Deng to praise the Cultural Revolution publically. Deng met with Yuanxin, and both sides left disturbed. Pressure mounted, and the Politburo began to criticize those who collaborated with Deng in education (such as Zhou Rongxin and Hu Yaobang). Indeed, education was at the focal point of these criticisms, seen as an area where Deng was too elitist. Deng invited Wang Hongwen to replace him in chairing meetings, Mao refused. Hua Guofeng was then introduced as acting vice chairman. Deng chaired a meeting where he was the target of criticism (including by Jiang Qing, now invited to meetings). Deng declined to summarize the meeting, saying he was hard of hearing. Deng attempted to appease Mao by saying he was isolated from the Cultural Revolution; Mao wanted clear approval. Deng may have refused to affirm the Revolution because he saw its persistence as a role-model for policy as a future impediment to actual fundamental change. Deng would rather be removed from office than lead over a government of rebels. During a meeting with Gerald Ford, Deng used the [[Romance of the Three Kingdoms]] as a warning for the US to not concede too much to the USSR. 
Deng was then criticized for allowing "rightist" senior officials to return to posts. Deng published a "self-criticism" on December 18, 1975, which, in fact, functioned as a defence of his record. In January 1976, he published another, standing his ground that Class Struggle should not be China's defining objective. Five days after this criticism, Zhou Enlai died, and Deng was immediately replaced by Hua Guofeng. He took center stage in a meeting with Ford and Kissinger before Zhou's death. Deng signaled a lack of trust in the US's improving relationship with the USSR, and Deng said that China was willing to combat the USSR by itself if need be.
As soon as Yuanxin aired Mao's criticisms Deng in front of the Pulitburo in October 1975, all his reforms stopped. These reforms were not, however, destroyed. Deng's criticism did not affect his military reforms, and his economic plans were later rebranded as the "Three Fragrant Flowers."

## Sidelined as the Mao Era Ends
Zhu De, founder of the Red Army, died in July 1976. Mao followed suit in that September.
Mao gave very moderate recognition of Zhou's service after his death, which backfired due to Zhou's public popularity. Deng presented the eulogy, but Mao did not show up to the funeral. During his later illness, Mao did not meet with Zhou once. Mao allowed foreign ambassadors to send their condolences, but no foreign delegations would be allowed. The Chinese people, meanwhile, were heartbroken, and there were massive amounts of public grief. Zhou was seen as the counterweight to the Cultural Revolution-era Mao, and he garnered respect among officials criticized then. Over a million people observed his funeral procession. Mourning was allowed, but no black armbands, a symbol of grief, were to be distributed. This January 1976 eulogy was Deng's last public appearance until 1977, and he showed rare amounts of emotion for his long time partner. Little information was published in his obituary, and mourning ended immediately after this service, a signal of Deng's weakness in government at the time.
In January 20, 1976, Deng told Jiang Qing that he wanted to hear from Mao as to the seriousness of his errors, to provide a path for reconciliation. Deng then effectively resigned for fear of more persecution. [[Hua Guofeng]] was Deng's replacement, a virtually unknown politician but one with a 20 year relationship with Mao. He was a moderate, joining criticism of Lin Biao but also appointed before the Cultural Revolution, and the Gang of Four saw him as manipulable. His title was publicly announced as a sidenote to a relatively innocuous article about a delegation from Romania. Deng remained out of work until the summer of 1977. Hua was not brilliant, but he brought stability and was undeniably pro-Mao. Mao Yuanxin thought of Deng's economic plans as bourgeois, continuing criticism of him. Hua Guofeng was moderate in his criticism, a constant throughout his brief rule. Jiang Qing called Deng a fascist, and Mao criticized this; the campaign to criticize Deng did little to change his positive public opinion.
In March and April, here was a movement to protest Zhou's lukewarm recognition (largely by placing wreaths and small bottles, pronounced xiaoping). The Gang of Four published an article criticising Zhou, which lead to former Red Guard members criticising Jiang Qing. In Shanghai and Nanjing there was public protest, although the Gang of Four was able to leverage supporters to quell some public displays of grief. These pro-Zhou demonstrations also morphed into public support of Deng. On April 3, over a million citizens went to Tiananmen Square to show support for this movement. These public repudiations of the Gang of Four continued to the next day. This was support for a removal from Mao's personality cult into a more moderate CCP. On April 5th, after anger due to wreath removal, militia was called to end these protests in Tiananmen. Over 100 protestors were arrested. Mao was distraught, a signal that his reception in history would be overwhelmingly negative. Deng Xiaoping was the people's preeminent leader, and Mao had no public mandate at this point.
This movement lead to Mao completely removing Deng from power. Deng stayed in a secret location from the Gang of Four, in order to not be attacked. At this point, Hua had complete control over the country's governance. Deng, however, remained in the Communist Party. Mao hoped that Hua would be supported by senior officials such as Marshal Ye and have long-term influence over the party. Deng expressed public support for Hua's appointment. Jiang Qing's efforts to expel Deng from the party were blocked by Hua. Mao allowed Deng to return to his old home, and was more comforting to him as Mao was approaching death. Hua rose above the Gang of Four due to this appointment, and, as he was a pragmatist, Hua naturally was seen as a threat to the Gang. Hua was a coalition builder, and did nothing radical when he came into power, thus commanding decent support. After April 7, Mao gave Hua a mandate to truly lead the country. Jiang Qing was emboldened by Mao's relative withdrawal from politics, and sought to build a bigger network. During this time, Yuanxin became much less relevant to politics as well. Hua had a formally high role, but did not have Deng's control of the bureaucracy.
After a May 11 heart attack, Mao no longer read party documents. After three more health incidents, he died on September 9th. The populace was worried for the future of China and its stability. Hua used the funeral planning committee as a way to sort out the party's pecking order. This funeral planning was seen as Hua's first success in government. Deng was excluded from public ceremonies.
After Mao's death, the public was scornful of Jiang Qing, seeing her as a woman who got to power using Mao's marriage and not merit, and was seen as angry and rude, even by her subordinates. After Mao's death, against his wishes, she made plays for complete power, although she had made far too many enemies for this to be realistic. She made ties to a militia, which was unrealistic but could have led to a futile rebellion. She expanded her role in the propaganda office and sought to gain youth support. Hua, [[Marshal Ye]], and other top leaders were afraid of a coup. An arrest needed to be careful, as the Gang of Four had their own guards and military conflict was to be avoided. On October 6, on the pretense of a Politburo meeting, Wang Hongwen was arrested, as was Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan, who submitted without conflict. Jiang Qing was arrested simultaneously in her residence. Allies were also monitored and pro-Gang information was prohibited in the wake of these arrests. Hua was also allowed to publish a version of _Mao's Selected Works_, giving him control over Mao's legacy. Allies of the Gang of Four were invited to a meeting, where they were taken hostage. Those planning resistance saw that the Gang was overwhelmingly unpopular and did not carry through. On October 18th, when news broke about this complete removal of the Gang, there was overwhelming public celebration on the streets.
These arrests marked the end of radical [[Maoism]].

## Return under Hua
[[Hua Guofeng]] was considered by foreign diplomats to be a cautious, competent, but not overly talented politician, someone prime to be a transition figure but who would be cast aside for a leader of greater competence. He would fall back on safer ideological platitudes rather than set forth new policy and lacked the competent leadership that Deng provided. At the same time, Hua Guofeng did much to end radical Maoism by pushing for industrialization, arresting the Gang of Four, and, interestingly creating China's [[Special Economic Zones]], directly pushing for foreign capital and Western technolgy.
Mao's power stemmed from personality, not institutions. Thus, although Hua Guofeng was unquestionably the successor to Mao, his lack of personal charisma and formal party loyalty limited his sway. Hua Guofeng was granted important party and military titles, and Marshal Ye pushed for these titles to have more formal power in order to let Hua Guofeng govern with more authority and to decouple personality and political power. Governmental procedure had been developed in the 1950s, after the [[Great Leap Forward]], and during Deng's brief 1975 stint in power, but they still were extraordinarily underdeveloped. Propaganda was developed extolling Hua's role in ending the Gang of Four in order to begin another cult of personality, which was controversial among older revolutionary politicians who saw Hua Guofeng as too young to hold this same level of reverence. Late 1978 saw Hua Guofeng unsuccessful in building a cult of personality, due to the factors mentioned above and due to many party leaders wishing for a more multilateral party. Marshal Ye and Li Xiannian (an economy minister) acted as crucial advisors, as Hua Guofeng had accepted the role of vice premier in 1976 amongst much turmoil. This gave him substantially less time to prepare to lead than Mao had, having prepared a revolution for many years. Both advisors were well suited, being pragmatists rather than radical Maoists or democratic reformers.
As Hua was seen to refuse to continue on Mao's path, reports of de-Maoization pressured Hua into reaffirming his belief in Mao's legacy. Although the Gang of Four was unpopular in the party, radicals knew that Mao still wished for their influence in politics. Hua published the "Two Whatevers" in 1977, stating that whatever Mao's policies and whatever Mao's instructions should be followed. In order to consolodate power, Hua Guofeng convened the 11th party conference, much like Mao after Lin Biao's death. While some crucial policy had to be ignored due to how early the conference was convened, Hua supported Deng and Zhou's Four Modernizations, and sought active builders as economic advisors rather than cautious planners.
Hua's relative ignorance of foreign policy coming into the role faded by August 1978, when he lead a delegation to Yugoslavia, Romania, and Iran. The first two countries had a liberalizing influence on him, as both were Communist yet were much more open to foreign trade and currency than China was, furthering Hua's determination to import foreign technology.
Hua wished to retain the socialist commune and production team structure of agriculture, but also sought to improve production using foreign technology, naivly wishing to implement these changes by 1980.
Hua would eventually self-criticize due to pushing too quickly on these ideas, as China was completely closed to foreign technology, had low stocks of foreign currency, and had a grossly mismanaged budget, leading to shocks upon sudden adoption of these ideas. These ideas, however, were much like Deng's overall vision of a relatively liberalized China, and were necessary measures in order to improve the Chinese economy and state. Deng's Third Plenum in 1978 was not when China opened to the world, but rather it was Hua Guofeng's leadership in 1977.
Deng's return was discussed as soon as the Gang of Four was removed, as he was clearly a uniquely talented leader. Deng could not overtly challenge Hua's leadership as his legitimacy did eventually derive from Mao, but a conflict between the two was predicted by foreign media. Ye and Xiannian both supported a subordinate Deng returning to power. Hua ordered, in the immediate aftermath of the arrests of the Go4, in October 1976, for Deng's self-criticism to continue, which was fully renounced by March 1977.  In early January 1977, Deng was resolved to return in some position, after Marshal Ye found that the Gang of Four unfairly incriminated Deng for the April 5 demonstrations. The Two Whatevers, however, implicitly said that Deng should still be criticized for his supposed planning of the Tiananmen demonstrations, and that he should thus not return to power, both galvanising some to speak against Deng returning to power and others to criticize Hua. Hua held a 1977 Central Party Work Conference in order to discuss broad political issues, which devolved into discussion about the two whatevers. After 1972, when Mao reversed some verdicts of officials censured in the Cultural Revolution, the power of these senior officials continued to grow. The Central Committee was made up of a large majority of senior officials, while the Politburo's center of gravity shifted more slowly. Hua said that the criticisms of Deng and the rightist reversal of verdicts was necessary, due to the precedent of Khrushchev's Secret Speech. Some respected officials, such as Chen Yun and Wang Zhen, veered from Hua's line during the conference, however these comments were not included in the reports of the conference, instead being circulated widely. He stated that Deng's return would be formally decided in the 11th Party Conference and 3rd plenum of the 10th, to happen later, rather than immediately commit to one decision or the other.
Deng's intraparty support continued to grow. Deng was wholly against the Two Whatevers, instead stating that interpretations should change based off of what was most correct, challenging Hua's authority to uniquely interpret Mao's writings. Hua sent confidants to negotiate terms of a return to power, while Deng refused to relent to supporting the Two Whatevers due to their potential to undermine Deng's legitimacy, saying that Mao himself acknowledged that he made mistakes. Deng wrote a letter affirming Hua's leadership, and thus was reinstated, officially to be done so at the July Plenum in 1977.
Deng would return to all his former positions, including Vice Premier, and had control over science as Deng considered it the most crucial of the Four Modernizations. Deng also sought to reform a writing group like the Political Research Office he had before. Deng also continued his modernization, shrinking, and raising of standards of the military, which took a backseat role compared to his work on science. Deng Xiaoping wanted to shrink the two decade gap between the US's and China's scientific capacities, acknowledging that China was behind and reinstating wide examination systems to educate the best. Deng was certain to not tread on Hua, but his focus on science was not uncontroversial, signalling confidence in tackling politically contentious issues.
On July 17, Deng formally returned to all prior posts with the Plenum's backing.  He was third in command, behind Hua Guofeng and Marshal Ye, but crucially above Li Xinnian. In his de-facto July 21 acceptance speech, Deng stated that Marxism-Leninism and Maoism formed the core of the party, but wished to construct the party and improve the status of intellectuals in the country. He viewed many to corrupt Mao's words by applying them in situations which were unsuitable and wished to foster inter-party Democracy (which he did not due in power). His return was applauded by the people, at times literally. He also reaffirmed his support of Hua's leadership, and placed himself as a supporter in the field of science.
Deng wished to see major transformations in science and education within 15 years of his reforms. While seeking to boost education and the literacy rate, Deng's major focus was research to benefit agriculture, industry, and defence. His hope was that science would renew China, and so passed major projects like a nuclear accelerator at a time in which the research landscape was still extraordinarily sparse. Deng's role was made slightly ironic due to the fact that, in 1957, he helped Mao persecute intellectuals, but with far less zeal than Mao himself had. Upon his 1973 return Deng never attacked intellectuals to the same extent as he did prior. Deng did not view intellectualism as bourgeois, saying instead that it had applications for every class and that the appalling treatment of intellectuals at the time constituted anti-labor action by the party itself. Deng never criticized Mao for his policies, instead focusing on the Gang of Four's anti-intellectualism.
In June 1977, an educational conference resolved to follow Cultural Revolution era educational policies against Deng's guidance. In response to threats like this, Deng threw his whole self at science and education, micromanaging at the age of 72. Deng said that experts should be given facilities and good living conditions, that foreign educated Chinese scientists should be welcomed home and incentivized to give lectures in China even if they elect to stay abroad, and that 1964/1965 graduates should be given assignments in intellectual affairs. He prioritized university-educated theorists versus practical technicians. Deng Xiaoping also was angry at the Ministry of Education's caution, telling them to think independently. Deng gained support from intellectuals that he lost in 1957, which was important as many of these people were in charge of important posts, such as propaganda.
Deng Xiaoping spearheaded the return of the [[Gaokao]]. Instead of those with the correct class and politics, meritocratic academic examinations were to be given. At the same time, universities were to work on the old systems of corrupt political recommendations for the year 1977, and so Deng set to introduce examinations instead for that same year. The process of constructing, administering, and grading tests meant that universities reopened later than expected, but they did reopen. Deng Xiaoping reconvened the education summit for the second time in the same year, defending his policies, including admitting some students out of high school instead of after labor. Of the population that was eligible to enroll in college, there were only university slots for 5.8% of them, and, for the first time, these would go to students without regard to background. Professors, many of whom did not teach during the turbulent years before, scrambled to assemble old materials and curricula. The intense examination system for university, high school, elementary school and even preschool slots led ambitious parents to funnel resources into having one child who could climb the ladder, causing some anger by those who did not pass these same tests. Still, the increase in the quality of Chinese education is palpable to this day.
The effects of the Cultural Revolution on science were still felt in 1977, with researchers performing their work at research institutes and propaganda teams sent to universities still occupying slots in them. He directed that a team of three leaders should head each university, with a scientific expert in each and someone accountable for improving living standards as well. The Three Poisonous Weeds of 1975 formed the basis of the new science policy. Deng worked with Fang Yi to improve relations with foreign science, and, while focusing on natural science, also believed in the necessity of social sciences for progress. Hua approved Deng's plan for an independent Chinese Association of Social Sciences, its independence allowing it to feel relatively free to concentrate on research instead of bending to the party line. Deng said that engineering was also necessary, but clearly focused on pure, theoretic science as a vehicle for change for all of mankind. In speaking, Deng had to protect his scientific reforms as consistent with communist policy of supporting forces of production instead of bourgeois activities.
As chief of the general staff, Deng Xiaoping had control over military planning. He had personal control of the military due to his  relationships with key party members, thus weakening Hua considerably. Early students of the Central Party School were far more progressive than previous officials and were expected to earn high posts. It became an opportunity for high-level officials to discuss innovative party solutions with the students. An especially influential paper (“Practice Is the Sole Criterion for Judging Truth”) argued that the social experience of the people was the only way to gauge truth, and thus Marxism need not be an unchanging ideology, but rather should be morphed due to experience. Essentially, if Maoism and Marxism fail, replace their ideas. Deng Xiaoping supported this and other controversial articles, which were either highly praised or lambasted. Articles in the CPC journal _Theoretical Trends_ did not need propaganda minister Wang Dongxing's approval to be published, and so went approved without him. The article was an attack on the infallibility of Marxism and the Two Whatevers, and thus conservatives like Wang were wholeheartedly against it. Two camps, with their poles at the Two Whatevers and Practice, quickly formed. Those who benefited from the Cultural Revolution by in large formed one camp, and those who were persecuted formed another, such as those who did not believe in Hua's inability to rule and the military.

## Creating the Deng Era

## Three Turning Points
After Deng's 1975 trip to France and Hua Guofeng's 1977 trip to Eastern Europe, the importance of travelling in order to see the advances the world had made in China's absence grew, much like the [[Iwakura Mission]] in [[Meiji Revolution | Meiji Era]] Japan. In the late 1970s, high-level officials traveled together, and, with the blessing of [[Deng Xiaoping]], were able to plan with the rest of the world in mind. These trips were meant to lead Chinese leaders to see how backward the country was and to inspire change. China stopped calling [[Yugoslavia]] revisionist, for instance, which was Maoist jargon for impure socialist.  In 1978, the State Council allowed a [[Special Economic Zones|Special Economic Zone]] to be established in [[Shenzhen]] in order to attract talent in China and away from neighboring [[Hong Kong]], with whom China wished to do business.  Japan was a parallel to China meanwhile, a tight, wartime economy who, under central leadership, liberalized markets and competed with the West.
The most important trip, meanwhile, was Gu Mu's to Western Europe in 1978. The trip was far deeper than Deng's to France, focusing on new technologies which could be imported. The participants were selected by [[Hua Guofeng]] due to their influence in Chinese policy in the fields they were meant to study. Gu Mu was second in command of the economy due to the fallout of the [[Cultural Revolution]] not affecting the _yezuwu_. Despite coming into power during the Cultural Revolution, he was a modernizer at heart, and thus Deng Xiaoping had few reservations in him leading the expedition. At the time, all countries visited normalized relations with the PRC, although the [[United States]] had yet to. The European nations were far more open than expected; China would not have allowed unsupervised visits to factories and other important sites. The high standard of living among workers was the most shocking fact, however. Far from being decedent, capitalist countries had surpassed China in almost every way imaginable, and thus science and education were the way forward, not ideology. The reports after the visit were long, and the extent of the gap between Europe and China was eye-opening to the Politburo. Upon meeting with Gu Mu, Deng Xiaoping agreed to follow the recommendations of the group, starting by importing cloth in order to boost textile manufacturing. Protocols with interacting with foreign businesses were to be established, in order to ensure that China's ignorance was not taken advantage of.
The Forum on Principles to Guide the Four Modernizations was convened in order to discuss the reports, with Gu Mu speaking at the opening session. Deng Xiaoping followed progress but did not attend due to his work on science. Hua Guofeng, an irregular attendee of work sessions, went to the majority of the 23 sessions. Li Xiannian, the chair, announced in the final session that China could no longer remain a closed economy, and that development was possible if action was taken. The balance that needed to be maintained was between openness and sovereignty. Despite over-optimism and the maintenance of some official channels which disabled fully open access, it was clear that the [[Chinese Economy]] was ready to open. Chen Yun, among other dissenters, wished to hear arguments against such quick borrowing, but this request was not honored.
Deng's visit to the Northeast in fall 1978 proved to be similarly impactful. This was set in the midst of the controversy between "Practice" and The 2 Whatevers, and Hua's propaganda minister visited the region a few weeks prior to boost the Maoist view. Deng was more open outside of [[Beijing]], as open talk was far less likely to provoke confrontation. This controversy mainly served as a pretext for Deng to eclipse Hua in power. Deng reasoned that Mao succeeded due to his adaption to the Chinese conditions of the time, and China should do the same at this moment in order to shed the legacy of the [[Soviet Union]] and show superiority to the capitalist system. This was an implicit attack on Mao, clearly implying that he was fallible. Deng also took the time to shore up military support in the Northeast and end the criticism of the Gang of Four.
The Central Party Work Conference was held by Hua from November to December, and formed the basis of the 11th plenum. It was an opportunity to more directly criticize Mao now that his death and the Gang of Four's arrest were so far away. Hua's plans for an agriculture and development focus were quickly swept aside for broader political discussion. Deng altered his speech sensing a much more opportune atmosphere, and Marshal Ye advised Hua to make concessions. The Two Whatevers, Hua's reaction to the April 5th Incident, and lack of pardons for Cultural Revolution targets were initial points of contention. Hua did not advocate for the whatevers and accepted the necessity of foreign investment. Blame was placed upon Mao, quietly and implicitly, for the [[Great Leap Forward]], and investment in local agricultural control was a fresh idea floated in the conference. Many participants, including the Central-South group as a whole, openly supported "Practice". The openness of the revolt against Hua was similar to [[Leonid Brezhnev|Brezhnev's]] coup against [[Nikita Khrushchev]]. Chen Yun advanced the discussion of political issues before economic and listed specific officials he believed needed to be pardoned and advocated for the posthumous conviction of Cultural Revolution leader Kang Sheng. Liang Lingguang stressed the need for stability and advocated for markets in light industry. 
Some explicitly stated that the April 5th demonstrations were revolutionary, not counter-revolutionary, which was published in newspapers without propagandist approval. Hua Guofeng completely changed position here too, and signed copies of a pro-Tiananmen book.  On November 25th, he spoke, relenting to the vast majority of these demands, including endorsing "Practice". Hua maintained power for the moment. It was expected that many of Hua's previous backers would self-criticize, but many did not. Deng allowed for Hua and allies to remain in order to not show that a power struggle was ongoing. The Politburo was expanded to allow for new, more revolutionary, members. Chen Yun was made vice-chairman despite his recommendation of Deng due to his deep experience in economics. With Deng's control over most military matters and his influence over the party and Chen's control over personnel and economic matters, it was clear that an irreversible shift in power had occurred.
After Deng's trip to Southeast Asia, Marshal Ye briefed him on the atmosphere. Ye was kingmaker, being both a supporter of Hua, Deng, and a firm believer that absolute power caused China's ills. Deng and Ye met and agreed to limit personal power and for Deng to accept the position of preeminent party spokesman. Deng then reassured colleagues that a repudiation of Maoism was not incoming. He also sought for realism; not all of China's problems could be solved immediately, and stability was necessary for development. Deng refactor his speech for the closing of a work conference now that he was functionally China's preeminent leader. In the midst of normalization of US relations and a response to Vietnam's attack on Cambodia, Deng now had to turn his attention to setting the tone of his rule. Deng sought to outline the extent to which he would allow freedom, depart from Maoism, how he would ensure stability among other factors. Rather than set policy, it was meant to show how he would rule. He announced that he intended to allow the masses to offer criticism and for intra-party democracy to flourish. He stated that Mao made mistakes but provided guidance, and that a legal system would ensure that one man could not make such mistakes again. He encouraged autonomous decision making among experts as well. This speech was a seminal moment of hope that the tragedies of Maoism might finally end.
The Third Plenum served as a confirmation of what was laid out in the work conference. Deng and Hua maintained their roles, but it was clear that Deng was paramount ruler. Chen Yun became vice-chairman of the Central Committee. Deng's speech was treated as more important than Hua's, and the plenum was compared to Yan'an rectification to allow the Four Modernizations to commence.
Deng became leader without any formal recognition of such. The covertness of the transfer was to hide the fact that such a power struggle was ever taking place. Officials also did not want to concentrate power in one person, and the lack of formal titles was a check on Deng's power. Hua was able to have such power as he was a far weaker personality than Deng. While both men were publicly courteous, the relationship was naturally awkward in 1979 when Hua was a titular leader. While Deng was more powerful, Hua still had allies and, had Deng overextended himself, Ye and Xiannian would not have taken kindly to another dictatorship. Deng began to sweep Hua aside in mid-1979 upon constructing his own group and power structures. During Deng's elevation, some criticized the party publicly, raising the question of how much freedom was tolerable.

## Setting the Limits of Freedom
The [[Cultural Revolution]] did far more to destroy old culture than create a new one. Many of those persecuted during its events passionately wanted to speak out or attack those who attacked them. The question remained, how much freedom was allowable? If mass protest was allowed, some, including Deng, feared that China would see chaos akin to the revolution itself. Many of those involved in science, education, and the youth wished to see more public expression, those involved in security wished to see less. Both those from high and low backgrounds usually did not test the boundaries, instead it was radical party youth, veterans, and party members with connections protecting them that tested the limits of Deng's new freedom. Deng allowed public discussion of the cultural revolution in the "Democracy Wall" near Tiananmen, and an intraparty discussion invited intellectuals to set new guidelines.
The Democracy Wall followed in a Chinese tradition of posting notices in highly trafficked public places. The same wall was once full of anti-Deng messages for following the rightist way and anti-Gang of Four messages during their fall. The Communist Youth League posted a version of their journal to the wall, which was censored due to lack of praising Mao. Mao was questioned for tolerating Jiang Qing, for promoting Lin Biao, and for smothering Deng's career. The tolerance of this publication led to further questions, poems, essays, and accounts to be posted on Xidan wall. With those speaking as ignorant about the outside world as Chinese leaders had been, many were over-optimistic in Western-style democracy and wished for it to replace communist thought. Many posts were written by those who were victimized, including the 10 million who were forced to still live in rural China and those who were unable to continue their higher education. [[Marshal Ye]] and Hu Yaobang both supported these dissenting posts, alongside Deng. Foreign correspondents spoke to Deng and had candid conversations with locals. People's Daily posted in January 1979 that the stifling of Democracy was negative for the country amidst some scuffles and more radical views being expressed. As time went on, Deng elected to not speak in support of the wall as more messages were explicitly anti-Communist party. Wei Jingsheng, an uneducated man, became a passionate spokesman for democracy, seeing the Four Modernizations as entrenching the class interests of the party. Upon the ending of the Vietnamese war, Deng stopped benefiting from the demonstrations as they had reformed from anti-Hua to anti-party. In March, Beijing prohibited anti-party public materials. Wei Jingsheng was arrested the next day and the amount of those visiting Xidan wall steeply dropped. Deng's souring on Xidan Wall is often seen as a turning point and a deep disappointment to intellectuals: the party still had reins on public discourse.
Marshall Ye convened the Conference on Theoretical Principles in order to solidify the guidelines of the party. Wang Dongxing, a former backer of the Whatevers, had undergone self-criticism while Hu Yaobang took his mantle as head of the Propaganda Department. Hu's purpose was to see how propaganda could benefit the Four Modernizations and the opening of the country. Most of the high-level participants were liberals in universities or newspapers. Both these talks and the democracy wall were avenues for heartfelt discussions for an open intellectual Chinese environment. Hu sought to both boost Hua and Deng, and praised Hua's leadership. Deng sought clarifications on how a socialist democracy should be oriented. Supporters of the Whatevers were meant to undergo self-criticism. Some feared backlash from speaking if leadership became more conservative. Some high-level leaders thought that theorists were too radical in the conference. Chen Yun and Li Xiannian both feared that criticism was beginning to threaten stability. 
Deng stated, in a meeting of party leaders, that there were threats to stability, and a return to some Maoist legacy would help solidify peace. Deng, like Mao, had let intellectuals speak and was surprised at the extent of the backlash, but, having learned from the [[Anti-Rightist Campaign]], he was careful to maintain the loyalty of the intellectuals. He wanted more freedom than in Mao's time, but to have a clear boundary between acceptable and unacceptable criticism, specifically the writings could not challenge socialism, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the leadership of the CCP, or [[Marxism-Leninism]] and Maoism. He stated that socialism can face setbacks, but these setbacks are not due to socialism, but rather China's imperialist and feudalist legacy. People must respect Mao, as he was the paragon of the people's revolution. 
Marshal Ye was unable to unify the party's ideology, as the gap between the pro and anti democracy sides was too large to resolve in theoretical discussions. Deng viewed central leadership as necessary to ensure stability. Hu stated that he supported Deng's speech, but his opening speech belied this point. These differences led Deng to remove Hu from his position in 1987. The hope of the Democracy wall had ended, but its impacts remained. Intellectuals were more restrained, but very few were punished, speaking to Deng's relative restraint. In the course of Deng's rule, the space of public discussion necessarily expanded. Deng faced this tug-of-war which eventually resulted in the famous events at Tiananmen.

## The Soviet-Vietnamese Threat
Deng Xiaoping had control over China's foreign policy since mid-1977, and needed to ensure that China maintained its road to modernization, which he did by opening to [[Japan]] and the [[United States]], and defending against aggression from the [[Soviet Union]] and [[Vietnam]]. Beginning in January 1978, Deng went on an expansive 14 month tour of the world to signal China's new foreign policy and an openness to ideas and participation in world affairs. 
Deng originally did not wish to manage foreign affairs due to it being a taxing job, but he was by far the best equipped candidate to lead due to his tutelage by Mao and Zhou. While others had the knowledge, Deng was, like Zhou and Mao, willing to meet foreign leaders as equals, with eloquence, confidence, and a backbone. Deng was particularly businesslike, focusing directly on the matters that were most important to China. His honesty and willingness to work with others won the respect of people like [[George H. W. Bush]]. Deng did not seek to surpass other countries, like Soviet diplomats, but acknowledged that China was both relatively underdeveloped and a hugely important and giant rising economy. 
Deng's theory of foreign policy was Mao's: identify the enemy and isolate them from their allies. By 1969, that enemy was the Soviet Union. Upon the end of the [[Vietnam War]] in 1975, the USSR's relationship with Vietnam became uncomfortably close. If the Soviets wished to be the world superpower, then Vietnam wanted to be the power of Southeast Asia: unacceptable to China. The Soviets had access to refurbished formerly American ports in Vietnam, and the country housed Soviet missiles pointed directly at China at 1977. Meanwhile, the Soviets had armed their Chinese border. India cooperated with the Soviet Union, and the Soviets were to invade [[Afghanistan]] in the [[Soviet-Afghan War]]. Like in a game of [[Go]], China was beginning to be surrounded and was prime for capture. Vietnam was the main point of contention due to their aggression in Laos and the region as a whole.
Deng felt betrayed by Vietnam, both because, in his French communist days, he collaborated with Vietnamese anti-colonialists (he and Zhou Enlai both had met [[Ho Chi Minh]] much earlier), and China contributed substantially during the Vietnam War. He recognized Vietnam's historic hostility to China and the fact that Vietnam wished to use both China and the USSR as leverage. China did not vouch for Vietnamese independence in the 1954 Geneva Peace Treaty and that China's normalization of US relations in 1972 alienated Vietnam. The Chinese offered substantial support if Vietnam turned to them instead of the Soviets, but eventually Vietnam backed the USSR in the [[Sino-Soviet Split]].
The Soviets helped rebuild Vietnam, while China offered little in the wake of the [[Cultural Revolution]]. Meanwhile, China directly supported [[Cambodia]] at the same time. Vietnam wanted hegemony and China would not give it. Deng presided over some Vietnamese aid in 1975 to hope to repair relations, but, in the era of [[Jiang Qing|The Gang of Four]], a more overtly hostile relationship resumed. Despite Vietnam wishing to gain some independence from the Soviets, they were forced to turn to Moscow for their aid in exchange for backing Soviet foreign policy, further driving China to Cambodia. China refused to give Vietnamese aid and furthered the Spratly Island dispute while Deng was not in charge. Despite the Gang of Four's arrest, initial optimism that the relationship could be improved was shattered.
Deng Xiaoping's 1977 return coincided with Soviet-Vietnamese cooperation being solidified. Chinese and Cambodian border clashes became far more frequent, and Vietnam joined [[COMECON]]. In 1975, Vietnam began persecuting the 1.5 million Chinese in Southern Vietnam, and China's demands for this to stop were unanswered. Deng called Vietnam the [[Cuba]] of Asia, a base for Soviet attacks on China. 
Deng's first foreign visits were to [[Burma]] and [[Nepal]], both meant to ensure China's borders were secure. Despite the red guards, both countries were relatively friendly to Chinese interests. Burma was isolated from the rest of the world under [[Ne Win|Ne Win's]] government, and was easily persuaded to improve relations with Cambodia. Deng visited [[Buddhism|Buddhist]] sites in order to show appreciation for Burmese culture. Meanwhile, [[Indira Gandhi]] forced Nepal to look toward Chinese support for their Zone of Peace, but also implicitly signalled openness to working with India against the USSR. 
China was also in need of good relations with [[North Korea]], due to them being another potential anti-Chinese pariah. In 1953, Deng helped launch an aid program after the [[Korean War]], and thus he personally had ties to the country. China's opening to Japan and the US both worried North Korea, and Deng was open about his plan in order to not surprise North Korean leadership. Deng attended the Thirtieth Independence Anniversary of the DPRK to stroke [[Kim Il Sung|Kim Il Sung's]] ego. Deng encouraged North Korean modernization and recommended caution with the USSR. This mission was a great success, and Kim Il Sung would later defend Deng Xiaoping's liberalization to other Communist leaders.
Despite the Central Party Work Conference beginning in November 10, 1978, Deng Xiaoping instead visited Southeast Asia to gain perspective on opinions of a Chinese attack on Vietnam. Vietnam planned on unseating the Cambodian [[Khmer Rouge]] with the help of Soviet military advisors. In July Vietnam began to bomb Cambodia, and they were apparently planning on invading the country in December. Deng warned Vietnam of their policy of ensuring a strong military response. Other Southeast Asian countries were uncomfortable with this Vietnamese brinkmanship but saw it as an inevitability. Instead of sending troops, China would quickly capture and then retreat from a wide array of Vietnamese cities to show strength. Sending troops would make it likely for the Soviets to base their military in Vietnam, whereas a limited strike would likely be frightening but not threatening. Then, the Vietnamese would see that Soviet aid would not come and could not be relied upon. 
Deng started by visiting [[Thailand]]. China was relatively unpopular due to supporting insurgency in every Southeast Asian country, including Thailand and Burma. These threats were less prevalent in Thailand due to greater integration between Thais and Chinese, and thus Thailand was more open to Chinese diplomacy than its neighbors. Deng expressed a willingness to normalize relations with [[Indonesia]] and [[Malaysia]], both countries where Chinese desire for revolution took its toll, a support for [[ASEAN]] neutrality, and led Thailand to normalize relations with Cambodia. Thailand granted China air rights to supply Cambodia. Deng also said that he wished for Chinese Thais to live in accordance with Thai custom and law, a departure from Maoist rhetoric. In July 1979, the pro-revolution radio broadcasts were stopped. 
Meanwhile, Malaysia was more worried about Chinese activities than Soviet-Vietnamese cooperation. Chinese Singapore was partially cast out in order to avoid Communist revolution after Malaya's independence. Deng again supported ending the revolutionary radio broadcasts, which was done in 1981. Vietnam officially rebuke Malaysia's communist insurgency, whereas Deng struck a neutral tone. Instead of an ally, Deng simply wanted Malaysian neutrality in the conflict. Deng supported Malaysian hopes for the country to be a Cold-War neutral zone. While not making a new ally, Malaysia was pleased with the honesty that Deng brought to the table and the overall goal was achieved.
[[Singapore]] had reasons to not be too pro-Chinese, but [[Lee Kuan Yew]] had a particular grasp over ASEAN which would help tremendously in the upcoming conflict. Lee, despite being ethnically Chinese, signalled some distance between the two countries and kept to English in their meetings (in fact, he did not speak Chinese fluently). Both met to accommodate each other. Deng struck Lee with his urgency about the Soviet threat, stating that they spent more on the military than the US and Western Europe combined. Lee ascertained that, in the case of a Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, China would respond. Deng stated that in eight to ten years, it might be possible to regain Vietnam as a local ally. Lee stated that, while he had little ties to the USSR, ASEAN as a whole feared China more than Vietnam, especially due to the revolutionary radio broadcasts. China was still unwilling to alienate former allies, but contemplated seriously stopping. China, unlike Vietnam, was meant to keep its promises. Lee and Deng had built a strong relationship built by a shockingly similar and different background. Lee was the deepest political relationship Deng would have due to their mutual understanding. Singapore was a sterling example of Asian development, and Deng was a thoughtful and realistic leader. Singapore left another deep impression on Deng; he had visited in 1920 so the amount of progress that Deng was able to see furthered his want of modernization. Singapore was an orderly example of reform, a functional state with outside capital.
Deng sought to use his relationship with ethnic Chinese outside of China in order to feed funds and information back to the motherland. Some were persecuted to the point where they still harbored resentment, some saw opportunity in opening up. Some of those persecuted regained their homes or were compensated. China needed to maintain good relations with these Southeast Asian countries too, except for, of course, in Vietnam. The ending of support for revolutionary groups coincided with the [[Chinese Communist Party]] wishing to become a party of governance, not revolution. 
Deng, when presented with a problem, first understood the root issues. He would individually tackle new problems created by his approach. In order to counter Vietnam, he would need Southeast Asian allies, to get these allies he needed to stop supporting local communists. In order to modernize and further contain the USSR, he would turn to Japan and the US.

## Opening to Japan
Deng's intentions in improving the [[Sino-Japanese Relationship]] were two-fold, Japan could be a crucial ally against the growing Soviet-Vietnamese block, and Japan could substantially aid China's four modernizations. It had opened in the past to become a prosperous market economy and had those willing to back Chinese investments. Beyond convincing Japan to supply aid, Deng also had to convince a skeptical Chinese public, taught since the [[Sino-Japanese War]] and to treat Japan as an enemy, that Japan was a potential partner in the world. In a climate of growing Soviet hostility, Japan and the US were open to the idea of seeing China as a partner in 1978. Few were in as good a position to change China's mind on Japan as Deng, a soldier against Japan for eight years.
China and Japan's attempts to draw up a foundational treaty were held up by China's insistence to state that no country should try to gain hegemony over the region, meant as a bulwark against USSR encroachment. Amidst Japanese fuel shortages, Japan, a pacifist country, sought to not anger the Soviet Union. In autumn 1977 Deng hosted multiple pro-China Japanese leaders while Japanese business interests lobbied for reopening. In 1978, Japan believed that a reworded version of the anti-hegemony statement might be more acceptable to the Soviets.  Amidst the eve of the war between [[Vietnam]] and [[Cambodia]], China buckled and allowed the reworked treaty to be accepted, forming the foundations of a Chinese-Japanese relationship. Deng was prepared to visit the country in victory.
Deng's visit to Japan was one of the most impactful of any foreign leader in the country's democratic history. Deng expressed hope that two thousand years of goodwill could continue despite temporary conflict. Deng let Japan repent for their crimes while not demanding they go any further than acknowledgement. In 1973-1975 Deng was affected by many visiting Japanese who spoke admiringly about Chinese influence, and his ten day visit saw him meeting many of these same old friends. Deng and Prime Minister [[Fukada Takeo]] spoke admiringly about each others countries and possibilities of future cooperation. Deng, the first Chinese leader in modern times to meet the emperor of Japan, was pleased at his very indirect mention of guilt as well. Deng sought the "magic drug" of modernization, and remarked on a visit to Kyoto that the positions of student and teacher were reversed.
Deng was accompanied by Liao Chengzi who had worked, studied, and led Chinese delegations in Japan while also having participated in the [[Long March]] like Deng. Deng was both fascinated by Japanese technology and Japan's government-led transition from a closed, World-War 2 era economy to an open market economy. [[Tanaka Kukuei]], a former prime-minister, said that this normalization of relations was the most significant development since the [[Meiji Revolution]]. After a dinner which was the best attended by Japanese top-executives in history thus-far, Deng made the first press-conference of any Chinese leader. Deng deflected a question about the [[Senkaku Island Dispute]], took partial blame for Mao's mistakes in the [[Cultural Revolution]], and expressed humility in needing to develop. In order to develop, Deng Xiaoping said that surface level reform was not sufficient, but China must acknowledge that it was backward and must learn from countries like Japan. In touring a factory in Osaka, Deng was told by an executive that private companies would be reluctant to share information about technologies as their proprietary knowledge formed the basis of profits. These senior Japanese leaders that met Deng were seen as statesmen by the Japanese, those who brought Japan from a starving country post-war to a thriving country who wished to turn a new page in Sino-Japanese affairs. Inayama, Deng's principle business host, had ties to China and helped modernize a Wuhan steel plant. He was often accused of being too kind to foreign countries, but Inayama sought to benefit society (including China and South Korea) even at some cost to his company.
Deng conveyed to the Chinese that western "exploitation" was false, workers owned their own homes and used technology unavailable in China. He started to understand the term "management" there as well. Management became a neutral term for Western thought and Deng was able to usher in much modernization past conservatives by seeking socialism with good management. After Deng's trip, some economic officials took a more detailed study trip to Japan. After a month, they were optimistic about China moving towards Japan's direction. Japan had learned to treat workers much more equitably than what Marx had admonished, for instance. Some training programs were set up to adjust China to Japan's economic model, to set prices off of supply and demand, to improve production quality, to collect advanced metrics on production. The Deng era, by and large, saw productive Sino-Japanese relations, and Japan was the most crucial country in building Chinese infrastructure.

## Opening to the United States
Deng Xiaoping visited the American Secretary of State [[Cyrus Vance]] three days after returning to work in 1977. Cyrus met with [[Hua Guofeng]] a day later, showing that the Americans understood that Deng was the key player. Renormalization of relations between the two countries was one of Deng's key priorities. After [[Richard Nixon]]'s 1972 visit to China, China was surprised at the slow speed of normalization due to American political infighting. After [[Watergate]], [[Jimmy Carter]] met with Chinese leaders and signalled support for talks. Deng's talks with America had the same two motivations as his to Japan, the Soviet threat and modernization. Even working with Europe meant recognition of American patents, and thus, in order to work at all with the West, all paths went through America. One of Deng's few hard lines was a renunciation of defence and recognition of [[Taiwan]], hoping that American abandonment would lead to reunification.
Due to controversy over the Panama Canal Treaties, Carter instructed Vance to postpone the controversial issue of normalization. Vance was, himself, motivated by his want to normalize relations with the USSR via the [[Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty]] negotiations, and normalization would postpone this as well. Vance came into talks hoping for more leeway on the Taiwan issue than Japan received. Vance talked to Chinese foreign minister [[Huang Hua]] who passed on Vance's concerns to Deng. Vance wished for some US governmental presence in Taiwan. Huang exploded the next day, practically threatening war with Taiwan. Deng did not waiver as well. Deng also criticized the US's passive reaction to Soviet withdrawal from Vietnam. Deng wanted the US to give no concessions to the Soviets and wanted a harsher US policy. Deng rejected Vance's proposal for a "flagless embassy" but also gave the US some time. Wanting for better relationships, Deng tried to circumvent Vance in future talks, viewing him as too hardline. Deng viewed Taiwan as a domestic issue, and would not accept any continued US presence in the country. Deng also met with [[George H. W. Bush]] and conveyed a similar message. Ambassador Woodcock spoke against the US policy of seeing the nationalist government as the sole representatives of China, and Carter privately agreed. Carter pushed ahead on normalization and SALT simultaneously, sacrificing the prospect of normalizing relations with Vietnam to do so. Deng's preferred candidate, anti-Soviet National Security Adviser [[Zbigniew Brzezinski]], was meant to prepare for these talks.
Brzezinski was preparing to travel to China immediately after the Panama Canal Treaties passed. Overall reception of normalization was positive in Congress, although it was still polarizing. Vance followed in instructing staff to dedicate themselves to normalization. US leaders prized secrecy, as many officials would be forced to oppose talks on political grounds if leaks were to occur. Brzezinski and Huang discussed, and Brzezinski was authorized to accept the Chinese principles on Taiwan except that military force should not be used. Brzezinski highly admired Deng's straightforwardness and intelligence. Deng allowed the US to state that force should not be used, and Brzezinski privately agreed to break ties with Taiwan. Deng opposed the SALT talks and hoped for more European militarization to distract the Soviets from Asia. Deng also hoped for US technology exports to be allowed. Brzezinski briefed Japanese leaders on his intention to normalize. China stopped criticizing US policy at the government's request. For his part, Deng tried to hasten formal normalization after these meetings.
Deng hoped for Chinese students to be sent to the US for education in order to improve China's science. China apologised and gave compensation to scientists persecuted in the [[Cultural Revolution]], and especially those with ties to the US. Carter's science advisor led the highest-ranking delegation of scientists to visit any foreign country to China. Deng pushed for, and was given, the right to send 700 Chinese students immediately with the hope for more in the future. 
Vance pushed for the right for cultural and commercial interchange to continue between the US and Taiwan while agreeing to China's three points. Huang Hua led the negotiations until Deng stepped in at the very end. Huang led the author of [[Red Star Over China]] to meet Mao, served under all three prior leaders, and was, during the Cultural Revolution, the only ambassador stationed abroad. He was also China's first ambassador to the [[UN]]. Woodcock was a trusted American negotiator with a union background. Deng followed some negotiations and led the final meeting. Deng insisted that the Japanese formula was already a Chinese concession and gave unclear support to a peaceful resolution to the Taiwan problem. Chinese negotiations generally move from general principles to detailed discussion. Americans, meanwhile, like raising every issue and deal with the whole problem. The main issue was arms trade, as if it were cut off reunification would be far more likely. Washington already tacitly agreed to the [[One China Policy]], and this was leveraged by the Chinese diplomats. Deng tolerated US-Taiwanese cultural and commercial ties. The US threatened postponing talks to 1979 due to fears of a leak and sent Taiwan outdated fighter jets while talks continued. A draft communique was written early November, but due to the Central Party Work Conference and Deng's Southeast Asia trip the response only came in December. Deng gave an interview with an American journalist in late November endorsing normalization for the sake of world peace. Deng's party minorly revised the communique and hoped for its January release, and held Woodcock for further talks. Deng hoped for no arms-trade between the US and Taiwan and hoped for an anti-hegemony clause, but mostly approved of the US version. Deng was to visit the US and had basically resolved the issue comin into the Work Conference.
Carter, suspecting a possible leak due to increased activity, moved up the announcement to the next day, December 15th. US diplomats frantically worked to push this through, talk to key players, and strategize about reactions. Deng and Woodcock met multiple times that day to iron out issues, including including the anti-hegemony clause. Beijing seemed to not understand that the US would resume military sales to Taiwan, and this issue was important enough that it could derail the entire trust-building exercise. Deng was furious and rejected any possibilities of arms trade, wanting to contain [[Chiang Ching-Kuo]]. After an hour, Woodcock and Deng came to an agreement that normalization was the utmost priority and thus the Taiwan issue was delayed. Deng would have to publicly rebuke Taiwanese arm sales, and thus the Americans promised to be quiet in order to not downplay the importance of these talks. 
Deng chose normalization over reunification. He possibly did so for two reasons: normalization increased his domestic standing and improved modernization. Deng also sought to contain the Soviet Union: [[Leonid Brezhnev|Brezhnev]] was to visit the US as well and these talks put Deng before him. Deng continued to pressure Washington to stop arms sales, but the most pressing issue was normalization. The party and public were very happy to hear of normalization. While Taiwan was outraged, international opinion was overall highly positive.
Deng visited the US in late January and Early February of 1979. Deng was met with uncertainty about his reception and his ability to not anger any side in impromptu speech. Curiosity was very high and Deng was called the Time Person of the Year. Carter was also subdued, due to his inability to find lasting peace in the Middle East and popularity of about 30%. He also worried about further alienating Taiwan, an old ally; he broke the news to Chiang of breaking official ties around when it was publicly announced. Deng was taken to cities with good climates, such as Seattle, Atlanta, and [[Houston]], showing the extent of US planning for the trip. Deng, interested in industry, was shown Houston's NASA Space Center and drilling technology. The Chinese Liaison Office, to become the embassy, was overstretched in preparation. Deng hoped to inspire interest in America among the Chinese public. Deng, in a dinner, stated that China had the capacity to launch a nuclear strike on the Soviets, possibly even Moscow. Deng ate with Carter and discussed their views. He called Vietnam the Cuba of the East. Deng told Carter and Mondale of his plans to strike Vietnam. Carter urged caution but did not oppose such a move. Carter thought an attack could harm normalization by painting China as an aggressor. Deng succeeded in causing Soviet caution about outwardly allying with Vietnam for fear of US reprisal. Carter wished for freedom of warship and missionary activities in China, and Deng, while stating that this could change the Chinese way of life, seemed to have softened somewhat on the issue. Nixon was invited to a banquet, his first after Watergate, and supported Carter's normalization. China agreed to allow more US journalism and trade was meant to increase. Deng was impatient in improving technology and didn't seem to understand the motivation behind patents. Deng was interested in the American idea of [[Separation of Powers]] but found it inappropriate for China.
Visiting other cities, Deng focused on commerce, science, and public relations. Although there were protestors, most were curious and felt positively towards Deng. Deng gave a speech prizing the American freedom of belief and ability to teach. Deng was interested in [[Atlanta]], a formerly poor city that had developed, and sought a similar model for improving impoverished areas of China. 
Carter praised Deng's intelligence and sensitivity, refraining from harming US-Soviet relations too. The trip's message of peace resonated with both peoples. Khrushchev's similar visit to the US was colorful, trapping attention but was also more opinionated. Deng's timid plan allowed him to gain much more than Khrushchev was able to in the end. Businesspeople, politicians, students all visited China in a mark of a new era of US-China relations. Some in government feared that there was over-optimism, that many Americans did not grasp the chasm between the two countries' political systems and views on Taiwan that still lingered. This trip did the most to introduce ideas of modernity to the Chinese public as well. They largely supported this new, American way of life. The spark of this visit helped ignite a fire of revolution in 1979. Many Chinese were overenthusiastic about adopting modernity, failing to grasp the distance between the development of both countries. Deng had five international visits in fifteen months; he would never leave China in his remaining 18 years.

## Launching the Deng Administration
December 1978 saw Deng assume the top position of Chinese leadership without a team or uniting vision of his rule. He set out to replace Hua and his allies with his own people in order to build a team dedicated toward modernization. While hoping to set China on a new path, there were enough Maoists still in charge that Deng had to be careful to not come off as China's Khrushchev. Deng's 1979 speech on the Four Cardinal Principles were meant to blunt conservative attacks, but many still viewed him as too pro-Capitalist or were against his strike against Vietnam. Many in the military were against _Practice_ or supported Hua due to being Mao's chosen successor. Many rural soldiers and people felt that Deng threatened the collective farming system that they hoped to benefit from, and so Deng's support was mainly urban. Deng intentionally criticized Lin Biao and the Gang of Four instead of Mao, and the Two Whatevers instead of Hua Guofeng. Hua Guofeng would make one of his last presentations by discussing the Government Work Report at the 5th National People's Congress. 
Deng climbed a mountain proving his health in his July tour of Northern and Central China. This publicity stunt was analogous to Mao's swim in the Yangtse. Deng then gave a speech stating that the key issue was finding capable successors, making it clear that finding allies was his number one goal. He wished to cultivate new party members and create the criteria to select and train leaders, first at upper levels and then at lower. Hua was sufficiently weakened that Deng and his allies had near complete reign in selecting this new caste of leaders. Deng's main priority was, logically, those who could complete the Four Modernizations. He focused on educated candidates who could deal with commerce and technology. The emphasis on qualifications rather than ideology was new for Communist China, as Mao selected members mainly on the basis of their adherence to Maoist thought. Deng then got to work, removing four crucial Hua allies as representatives of an anti-modernization bloc. Only in personal staff and military affairs did loyalty come into play. 
The two highest level officials, [[Chen Yun]] and [[Li Xiannian]], were not selected by Deng, but were rather so powerful that their demotion was impossible. Both were competent and worked alongside Deng with Zhou Enlai and Mao as early as the 1950s. Chen Yun had historically occupied posts higher than Deng's and was highly competent in dealing with economic issues. Xiannian had management over the economy under Zhou. Deng's personal selections were Hu Yaobang, leader of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhao Ziyang who improved industry in Sichuan, and Wan Li, former Minister of Railways. They were all dedicated to a common cause but were not friends with one another, rather having a coworker relationship. Deng Liqun was lower than the other three but worked as an effective speechwriter. Hu Qiaomu played a role in preserving some orthodox Maoist voice and opposing reform. Hu Yaobang served as head of the party and Zhao Ziyang of government. They did the daily work in their spheres and reported to Deng who set high-level policy. These were almost all senior officials, and due to the fact that younger generations did not go to university in the wake of the Cultural Revolution Deng was troubled by the lack of a solid next-generation of leaders. Only 31 of 165 promising candidates for next-generation leaders were university graduates. While they should not immediately assume power, Deng hoped that these promising leaders would rise quickly. Deng believed in personal mentorship to successors. Higher level leaders were to take an interest in the development of subordinates. 
[[Marshal Ye]] gave a seminal speech on the thirtieth anniversary of Communist governance. It was an analysis of the past 30 years that acknowledged the grave errors of the [[Great Leap Forward]] and [[Cultural Revolution]]. He was never criticized by Mao and was close to Zhou and the modern military, and thus was an ideal candidate to give such an assessment. Ye's speech stated that China's growth coincided with public education, called the [[Anti-Rightist Campaign]] a mistake, and said that the country was overzealous in collectivization. The Cultural Revolution allowed Lin Biao and the Gang of Four to rule in terror. Ye indirectly implicated Mao in committing some of these errors as well, the first such acknowledgement. Ye also praised Mao's ending of revolutionary class struggle and hoped that the country would unite for economic modernization. The speech was well received, seen as a rare sign of humility from PRC governance by many elites. 
Deng initially wanted to postpone analysis of Mao's role in Communist history, but many leaders wanted to review his role as it was so crucial in many issues of the time. Ye's speech proved that some rebuke of Mao's legacy need not provoke mass ire and polarization, and so he allowed leaders to prepare a document summarising this evaluation. The document became increasingly anti-Mao as Deng gained more power.
In summer of 1979 Hua Guofeng lost any semblance of equality with Deng. Many formerly shared responsibilities went to Deng and Hua was openly ignored in meetings. The fifth plenum in February 1980 is often seen as the beginning of the Deng administration, as that was when Hua's four allies were removed and Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang gained formal power. 
Deng made an important address of his priorities in January 1980. Deng stated that, in order to advance socialism, the government must turn its attention to growth. He also stated that promotion should be contingent on qualifications, and that modernization was a precursor to reunification with Taiwan. Deng stated that the following four items were necessary for modernization: consistent messaging, stability, effort, and competent and loyal leadership. He firmly was against freedom of the press, speech, and assembly when used in counter-revolutionary ways. He also hoped to see "one hundred flowers blossom" and removed restrictions on art to be subservient to politics. He was careful to set realistic goals in order to not disappoint the Chinese people. He hoped to quadruple the GNP by 2000 but warned that China would not become a welfare state. He had a distinctly capitalist message in emphasizing economic efficiency and productivity. He hoped that meetings would be short and that members would be well prepared and that individual responsibility would be championed. The freedoms formerly given to Red Guards were abolished in the new constitution and inner party democracy, that members should speak out when proposing new solutions, was prized. Incompetent members were to be removed. These principles were largely firm during all of Deng's rule.
At the fifth plenum, these plans came into effect. Key Hua allies such as Wang Dongxing were criticized and removed. Hua Guofeng was nominally still the premier but Deng's successors gained crucial positions and were actually in control. Zhao Ziyang became de-facto premier, Wan Li vice premier and head of the State Agriculture Commission. Hu and Zhao gained the leadership of daily work in party and government affairs. Lower level officials were able to dedicate themselves toward Deng and Hu's vision for China by disconnecting from Hua. Deng could be seen as having control of the whole party at this point. Lower level members kept a careful eye on the views of top leadership. Deng cleared the name of Liu Shaoqi, former second in command and a late friend of Deng, which opened up China toward a more sober assessment of Mao's legacy. He also was able to quickly shift the burden of agricultural production to the household level, a key move away from collectivisation. 
Deng was almost certainly calculated in removing Hua's allies and chipping his influence starting in 1978. Hua was formally removed from chairmanship and leadership position in the Central Military Commission in June 1981, the last vestiges of his influence. 
This fall coincided with a reevaluation of Maoist legacy, a logical link. Deng was, as a young man, a fierce admirer of Mao and dedicated himself to his service. Deng was publicly unemotional about his two falls from Mao's grace and his son's paralysis at the hands of red guards sent by Mao. While Deng wished for discussion about Mao's legacy, he did not want to overemphasize his mistakes for fear of discrediting the party. Deng had to tow this line while supporting those who Mao condemned and casting aside class struggle. Despite his errors, Deng still found Mao Zedong thought crucial for the people and party. He had the revisionist document revised many times to be more pro-Mao, in order to position himself as a defender of Mao in the public eye. Around 5,600 party members commented on a particular draft. Some wished for more attacks on Mao, but other commentary made such open statements difficult. A compromise was to focus more on Mao pre-1949, which was less controversial. The question of [[Mao's Legacy]] became a question of political futures, something crucial to the path China was to follow. The end document praised Mao Zedong Thought while largely criticising the Cultural Revolution and Great Leap Forward. Deng left the possibility of further commentary on his legacy open in 15 years, a clear signal that future, more frank criticism was invited. Mao himself admitted to making errors, and thus, like Stalin's legacy, Mao was seen to have 70% merits and 30% faults. Deng met with a highly respected Italian interviewer to detract from the idea of a "demaoization." He stated that Mao made mistakes but that his successes were more important, unlike Lin Biao and the Gang of Four. Mao, later in his life, lost touch with reality and went counter to his own thought, and that the Great Leap Forward bore collective blame. Mao should not have selected his own successor Lin Biao, a clear parallel to Hua's appointment. Deng was highly rated in these interviews and maintained calm. 
Hua was largely quiet in his last days in nominal power, largely supporting the party line. Deng intervened in a report to include a deeper inspection of Hua's legacy, a justification of his removal. Hu Yaobang criticized Hua for continuing Mao's failed policies while commending him for his arrest of the Gang of Four. He also was said to have encouraged a personality cult and to have used the Two Whatevers to cynically gain power on the back of Mao's legacy. Hu claimed that Hua, alongside Deng, erred in trying to spur the economy too quickly, and Hua was resistant to reinstating officials such as Deng. Marshal Ye did not believe in analyzing Mao's errors, and Ye hoped for Deng to be under Hua and for both to work together. Ye was likely afraid of Deng becoming more authoritarian and thus spoke against him by backing Hua at this time. Marshal Ye accepted the majority position, however, and did nothing when Hua was removed. When Ye was ill in 1984/1986, Deng did not visit. Hua was completely removed without a factional power struggle and Deng's administration truly begun. 

## The Deng Era

## Deng's Art of Governing
Deng shied away from Maoist-style personality cults. Unlike Mao, Deng did not display pictures of himself, and schoolchildren, while taught some of his best known thoughts, did not spend time memorizing his quotes. Even though Deng did not have the top titles in China, only being vice-president of the party, vice premier, and chairman of the Central Military Commission, Deng was able to wield power as the paramount leader. Deng ruled from closer to the ground than Mao, rather than pass down edicts he was more focused on building the staff and systems needed to develop.
Deng had a substantial hearing problem which made group meetings difficult, so instead he spent most of his time working from home. His office director would give him news and sit in on meetings on his behalf or Deng would read reports. Deng read press reports, draft documents, and other reports while taking no notes. He would provide brief comments on some of the documents after reading which would be circulated. Some drafts he would immediately approve, others he wished for more work to be done. Deng focused on the largest issues and created long-term plans in order to tackle them. For some fields, like economics or science, he would largely delegate strategizing to others, whereas on other, simpler topics Deng would devise plans himself. Deng's secretary, Wang Ruilin, was able to not add personal opinion to his explanation of Deng's views, unlike Mao Yuanxin when Mao was in the same position. [[Hu Yaobang]] and Zhao Ziyang both forwarded important work to Deng for final approval. Deng had the ability to make a final decision but was not a micromanager. Deng always needed to consider the atmosphere in the government before taking a final decision. The Politburo and seven member Standing Committee were relatively disciplined during Deng's reign. The party Secretariat was refurbished to act like an inner cabinet of senior ministers for Deng. The Politburo met rarely and Deng hardly ever called meetings for the Standing Committee, so this parallel structure of power gained new importance. Party secretaries in the secretariat and politburo members worked in small groups on particular policy areas. Deng's power caused occasional conflict between him and area experts; Chen Yun, for instance, had a better grasp of the economy, as did [[Marshal Ye]] on military affairs. Even if conflict occurred, leaders would not air these opinions in public. Deng kept formal relations with Hu and Zhao, and relied on closer, older officials like Yang Shangkun who could give frank opinions about the atmosphere of the party. Deng paid close attention to party plenums in order to unify the Central Committee members and the 5 year party congresses in order to unify a wider range of delegates. Deng's speeches, over time, generally needed less formal writing and were not compiled into historical documents. Deng was not seen as personable or devious, but rather stern and goal-oriented. 
Deng valued authority like he valued discipline, without it plans could not be implemented. China's authority had dissipated during the Cultural Revolution and as a result was ungovernable. Deng wanted to instill a respect for a law, and partially did so by fear and respect for authority. Deng believed in Inner-Party Democracy, which was an open environment to criticize proposals alongside "democratic centralism" which meant that after a resolution was passed it should be obeyed and not criticized. His and the party's authority were linked by growth, which meant that a period of inflation shook the country's opinion of Deng. Deng generally attempted to act with authority and defend the party in order to not lose face to other party members, going as far as punishing dissident former CCP members. He did not believe in separation of powers even though there were different organs of power. Deng also viewed his personal control of the military as paramount. He would attempt to build public support for revolutionary policies prior to implementation. He often used subordinates to take the blame for policies in all but extreme cases like his Vietnam war. He oriented policy around long term goals, such as training and placing younger talent in positions of power. Deng would compromise in the short term to build long-term systems. He also sought to find out the truth, even if it went against his own beliefs, in order to not commit the same mistakes as the Great Leap Forward. Deng would often push ahead on reform before all facts were known, while still being overall cautious. He would take smaller steps, wait for the situation to cool off, and take another step. In order to preserve unity, he did not wish to dwell on past mistakes. Deng would experiment with policies that were radical, like some private business on small scales, before introducing more major reform. Deng would use folksy metaphors to explain policy like Mao. Deng focused on meritocratic recruitment. Deng always focused on the atmosphere to see what might get done, which was very difficult to get a hold of. He wished to push policy that would widely supported and thus waited for other officials to know what could be done with the broad points that Deng advocated for. If a policy worked, it was generally supported, and failures were quickly abandoned. Democratic centralism meant no dissonance lest there be consequences, and so Deng, to uphold his side of the bargain, would only work when a substantial faction was willing to try. 


### Full Citation:
Vogel, Ezra F. _Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China_. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011.

Tags: #history/asia/china #asia/china #politics/china #biography #time/modern-era/1900s #source
Dates Read: 20-12-2021
Date Created: 20-12-2021
Status: #status/draft