# El Ingenio
## El Camino Hacia la Plantacíon
[[The Antilles]] were called "sugar islands" by the English, linking the islands with a specific commodity and mercantilism. Despite other commodities like coffee and indigo being produced on the island, they found it necessary to bind the name with the commodity of sugar. Only the Spanish Antilles, and specifically [[Cuba]], were at the fringes of plantation economy until the middle of the 1700s. Sugar was secondary to tobacco, forestry, livestock among other crops. Cuba was close to the sea, had fertile soil, material to construct tools, oxen and cattle. Despite widespread logging being illegal, the respect for the law at the time was lacking.  [[Havana]] was the premier shipyard of the empire and had the manufacturing ability to produce machines for production. 
Thus, in the 1700s, the sugar economy grew, but not as fast as one might expect. The production of sugar largely depended on mass [[Slavery in Cuba | slavery]]. The _Real Compañía del Comercio de La Habana_ was founded in 1739 to help monopolize the tobacco trade and aid in the shipment of exports, seeing that the fleets were already at capacity due to the mass increase in production after an increase in slave importation. These monopolies, while violent, also allowed for the construction of an industrial base, and the Real Compañía was so successful that it paid 33% dividends on a small volume of goods. By 1758, during the [[Seven Years' War]], the Real Compañía became an obstacle to exports, not growing shipment capacity at scale with the doubling of production of sugar. The governor allowed for the taking out of some sugar, due to the mass amount of wealth kept in warehouses. It became clear that monopoly was unable to accommodate the massive growth in demand and production. The influence of the sugar-owning elites grew into _una sacarocracia_, rule by sugar, and there were racial tensions between Criollo manufacturers and Spanish merchants. Sugar had more creole influence, while Spanish commerce ruled tobacco. As well, the Spanish economy was stagnant while the Cuban economy was prospering, thus the metropolis both could not consume enough and lacked the shipping to export the produce. The British capture of Havana puts the Real Compañía in crisis, and the increase in production puts strain on the colonial system.
Since the 1600s sugar could be considered the first international basic good. Due to tariffs and protectionism, sugar colonies often found the most favorable markets to be of their own metropolis. Open markets, like in Russia or Germany, were more competitive and thus prices were lower. The main model was colony to metropolis to open market, and colonial powers clamped down on colonies selling directly to market. In order to do this, colonies would extract the most raw version of the good while metropolises would refine and manufacture it into something sellable. These purification practices were easily doable, but colonial powers maintained this system. There was a conscious decision for the colonies to under develop in competition with the metropolis, aided by the systematic prohibition of manufacturing on colonial soil. Cuba proved to be an exception, as, unlike Dutch, British, or French colonies, the production of sugar originated from Cuban colonists and not state development. Tobacco was controlled by the Spanish, and thus the sugar creole oligarchy took on an anti-tobacco and anti-metropolis stance in their production; the production of sugar was inherently political. Spain could not provide slaves or shipping and thus was useless in production, but Cuba could be self-sufficient. Spain lacked refining possibilities, and thus in the 1700s Cuba was the only colony to produce white sugar, and was able to outcompete European colonies on both quality and price. The 1700s was both characterized by mass European competition and bloodshed and the emergence of a capitalist, not mercantilist, order. Only in the 1790s did Cuban sugar become prominent enough to warp international prices, but earlier mentions of some influence in Europe do exist. The markets of the 1700s were ripe for expansion, with peak prices in 1701 and margins such that only one in three ships arriving still meant profit. The Real Compañía was meant as a mechanism to aid these exports.
Around 1725-1735 French colonies exceeded English colonies in sugar production. For the first 55 years, England was losing ground on their share of world production. Between 1740-1760, the disruptions caused by colonial wars helped Cuban production. In 10 years since the [[Austrian War of Succession]] in 1740 26 great manufacturers were founded. The British sugar lobby was one of the first political [[Pressure Groups]], and, responding to a decline in sugar production in all of the Sugar Islands other than Jamaica due to lack of land, had interests in Cuba. The Jamaican agricultural strategy of working land until it is barren and moving on would be copied in Cuba. The British limited sugar production in order to stop the need to expand to less profitable interior lands, something which was opposed by the sugar lobby. Others saw sugar as a hinderance to industrial development. In the wake of the 7 Years' War, both demand caused by the war and the great sugar production of Britain's new lands led to a depression of production in the Sugar Islands. During this war, Havana was captured by the British. The planters were furious at the decrease in prices, and, to the horror of the public, the French islands taken (including [[Martinique]], [[Guadalupe]]) and Havana were returned to their prior owners in exchange for North American land such as [[Florida]]. This treaty would be the last great political triumph for the planters, but British ideas for sugar production gained more influence in Cuba. This marked the first time that British slave traders directly worked with creole plantation owners, cheaper due to the saturation in the Sugar Islands. Slave traders poured in during the 11 month occupation. John Kennion alone brought 1700 slaves to Havana. They conservatively brought 4000 slaves total, multiple years of Spanish production, but were aided by the fact that the means of production already existed; the British accelerated the growth of the sugar industry. This happy time for landowners brought the brutality of slavery and racial superiority to previously one of the most harmonious islands in the Antilles, later blacks who fled during the war were tracked down and the last mill belonging to a black family disappeared. 

## Del Trapiche a la Gran Manufactura
In 1760 Cuba was a smaller sugar manufacturer. Between 1760-1792 the Caribbean commercial system was shaken, and Cuba became a key player in these events. The data is shaky and history generally turned its attention to the Colonial Wars, [[American Revolution]], and [[French Revolution]].  At this time, the king of sugar was [[Haiti]], followed by [[Brazil]]. Likely production was equal to export. England primarily exported for internal consumption whereas France reexported most. Sugar became the most important export good of France. Irregularity in supplies would drastically increase prices, leading to rampant speculation and limited future trading. Initially, goods were brought to physical markets where prices would be determined by supply on hand, but the instability of prices led to futures trading. The UK and Netherlands had no regulation on futures trading whatsoever, and France's attempt left much to be desired. This was an ancestor to clearing houses and commodities trading of the 1800s. France eventually banned futures trading before (and after) the French revolution due to their lack of regulation and abundance of disputes. The thirteen colonies were major producers of agricultural products used to feed slaves, and thus the American Revolution led to the starvation of massive amounts of slaves in the Sugar Islands and a crisis of production. In Britain, rum was given to soldiers, and Cuba had the sugar production necessary to supply which was much higher quality than that of the other Antilles. The war led American merchants to patronize Cuba instead of the Sugar Islands, and thus Spain was motivated to support American independence. There was contraband flowing before, but these relations were finally formalized. Highly important American merchants became a large presence in Havana. Cuba went from producing 2.7% to 6.9% of sugar from 1760 to 1792, and Cuba was the most benefitted sugar-growing region in the world at this time. Arango y Parreño, a major intellectual and guider of the plantation system, wished to see Cuba become what Haiti was, a plantation with possibly 500,000 slaves working it. In 1792, the US removed all sugar tariffs, while continental powers wished to create domestic production. In North America, maple sugar is produced, and some Italians searched for grape sugar. Only Cuba was fortunate to adavance so quickly.
Cuba has become the third largest producer, and this progress comes at the expense of nature and society by mass scale manufacturing. Cuban slavery went from smaller scale to wide-spread brutality after the mid 1700s. The surging demand for sugar hurt small-scale producers as volume was stressed. Under colonialism, the quality of life of the black man was reduced to as low as possible. The expansion of slavery and production turns attention from other activities which also aid development. The colonial system also allowed for substantially less innovation in production than the capitalist system. The production of sugar per slave remained constant in Cuba from the 1500s to 1800s. The landowner's wealth was built on slavery and tied to slavery, unable to modernize. Slaves were imported both by the British and by sugar growers themselves. Between 1765-1790 about 2000 slaves annually entered Cuba. British slave traders worked illegally, but even then the quantity of slaves was lower than demand. Purchasing of slaves was standardized in 1780 to avoid disputes and to put the man in the hands of whoever was wealthiest. Besides slaves, there were also salaried workers. The mill absorbed workers from other industries, tobacco, artisans. Planning, construction, clearing forests were done by salaried workers attracted by the high salaries. There were problems caused by having two separate workforces, one free and one enslaved, but the lack of laborers always meant that salaried workers were necessary. A mill was most profitable with 300 slaves, but the average was only 80. La Ninfa was an example of a mill with 350 slaves funded by theft of public funds by Arango y Parreño.
Sugar also needed to occupy land to expand. The ingenio was a transhumanist institution, wandering where profit was to be had. Production of sugar decreased the fertility of the land. Manufacturing processes were primitive and only actually 2 to 3 % of the cane. Firewood was their main fuel. Even areas with high productivity were abandoned if they ran out of firewood due to the costs of fuel. An ingenio needed livestock to feed slaves, firewood, harbor access, and to be relatively flat. The old ranching culture led to sufficient stock of cattle and oxen. Havana was benefitted as the favored port of the island. Tobacco had created some infrastructure that was parasitized by sugar. Between 1762-1792 Havana mills doubled their land footprint. The mayorazgos acted as a strange feudal landholding institution without any power or control, and thus had a feudal cover to a very-non feudal economic system. The legal system being corrupt allowed the real-estate law to become a quasi-feudal system whose monarch was the sugar plantations. Vegueros, small tobacco farmers, were the first victims of sugar-feudalism, their spots ideal for sugar as well. Arango y Parreño among others saw tobacco as an old-fashioned and lower than sugar. The expansion of sugar depopulated rural areas of Cuba. The vergueros were unhappy with this rule and the oligarchy attempted to convert them into quasi-serfs and take their land. The usurpation of the tobacco industry, which, for its faults, supported a small landowning class, both expanded the reach of the sugar mills and created workers forced to work for the sacharocracy. San Julián de los Güines was a major tobacco factory originally founded by peasants, but sugar workers burned perfectly good tobacco during the destruction of the Haitian sugar industry and Jose de Coca took these lands. This power came from governmental support achieved largely by bribery. Sugar owners positioned themselves as great leaders in history they influenced, and made Cuba take a step forward towards complete capitalism. In 1798, tobacco was imported from [[Virginia]] for Havana's use, showing the decline of the vegueros. Meanwhile, Vuelta Abajo was considered to have produced the best tobacco in the world, but Vuelta Abajo at that time did not have geographic significance, but instead meant planting outside of the reach of the sugar owners. Arango y Parreño blamed factories for removing small tobacco farmers, which were removed, of course, by ingenios. The Cuban land regime faced many changes, but the displacement of tobacco farmers was significant. The cattle ranches were not disrupted, as the tobacco farmers formed a peasant class while ranchers were similarly wealthy. 
In the mid 1700s the ingenio was an agricultural institution. At this point, workers were called farmers and work was seasonal, rarely even making use of water power. The workers were self-sufficient, growing to feed themselves. In 1759, there were 59 occupational ingenios around Havana, by 1792 227. In the expansion, growth was partially driven by small or medium mills expanding: mills that were too large were not economical and the optimal number seemed to be around 100 slaves. Increasing the black population provoked conflicts which necessitated stricter control. This security ruins family farms which necessitates the removal of self-autonomy. The amount of people necessitates a hospital and barracks too. This expansion is economically inefficient, and thus until the mid 1700s the system did not expand. Sugar is an economic system, and was impossible to grow without improving all the infrastructure that held it back. Tiny mills were generally destroyed or meant for sugar production for the poorest groups. An older currency was often used for expenses and became so accepted that counterfeits were made. Even funds meant for military use were used to found ingenios. The corruption of using public funds to support private businesses was common on the island and emblematic of the sugar industry. 35 million pesos enter the country during the Anglo-Spanish war due to the demand for sugar, giving the island access to currency again. The US, meanwhile, sold to Cuba to avoid economic crisis and used Cuban sugar for [[Massachusetts]] rum. The cash gained by the war led to speculation which led to a small recession in 1786. Industry first expands, and, when prices drop, the rich can acquire debt. Arango, meanwhile, portrayed this recession as an existential threat to Cuban production as a whole. The [[Haitian Revolution]], with former slaves gaining independence, horrified the landowners in Cuba, but also meant the irrelevance of their biggest competitor. Cuba, and Arango in particular, made sure that Haiti would never recover. French soldiers spoke of the destruction of Haiti's agriculture, while Cubans kept building. Since 1792 Cuba was a hub of capitalism from American merchants, Spanish wealth, and some former Haitian landowners. In 1806, the number of ingenios became 416 (from 227 in 1792). These new mills were more productive as well, triply as productive totally as in 1761. All major mills had more than 300 slaves. Cuba became hooked on sugar, and non-sugar (or coffee) activities were seen as unproductive. Merchants were both sellers and bankers and gained more importance too. Merchants supplied transport and warehouses, especially harming smaller producers as merchants charged higher and higher prices. Small producers fell into the hands of false contracts charging ridiculous interest. Mills were not owned often for more than 10 years by the same person due to these tricks. Merchants would ruin suing owners, for fear that precedent would be set if owners won. Usury (high lending) was a tremendous burden to the country's development. It exploits production and in no way aids it. Haiti's fall led to parts merchants and usury merchants to rise. Philip Allwood, a British merchant, urged the use of horizontal mills, and financed more slaves then all other importers put together. Larger merchants tried to expel him, and, despite being protected by Arango, succeeded in 1795.
Unlike the Sugar Island's production being spurred on by the metropolis, the Cuban production took place in spite of it. The first signs of the industrial revolution, the railroad, electricity, gas, steam power, appeared in Cuba before Spain. The sugar owners of the 1700 and 1800s saw themselves as the European bourgeois. This consciousness led the leaders to want to modernize production. In order to modernize, you need scientists as well as workers. The intellectual workforce thus served sugar, and intellectuals from other realms were brought to do this work. The sugar baron now goes abroad to find new techniques, new varieties of sugar, not just seeing his produce being shipped abroad. Arango wrote a ruthlessly pragmatic and unempathetic speech on Cuban agriculture, which served as the first American piece addressing correct manufacturing practice. Arango sponsored technical study trips to steal techniques from competitors. On this trip, Arango was most fascinated by European steam technology and saw in it potential to revolutionize his industry. He also stressed the importance of British refining on Cuban industry, that selling an unfinished product necessarily means subjugation to outside producers. During trips, technicians were brought, some for there knowledge, others went by themselves out of interest. Publications were written about sugar manufacturing as well. They translated foreign works strenuously and agreed to create a school of chemistry in Havana: chemistry was the art of making sugar. These publications represented that sugar also meant intellectual life on the island, a bourgeois facing life that was chained to feudalism. Writing styles varied because of a variety of opinion and purposes, the Havana newspaper was partially born to report on transactions.
Studies solved technical problems and some cooperation between firms was achieved, but this was the extent of progress under slavery. Thus, industrial progress leaves the ingenio behind. 1700s mills were very small scale and used primitive techniques, and only creole sugar was planted. The processes and designs were that of Brazil, and refining was very rudimentary and inefficient. The variety of processes used gave rise to 14 types of sugars of varying quality. Sugar was often carried by horse due to the poor roads. The manor was an extension of production. In the changes of the 1800s, a better variety of sugar, Otahití, was produced, alongside other varieties. This was an easy change, all that needed to be changed was the seeds in workers hands. The trapiche (roller) was the bottleneck, and either the structure or force (oxen) would need to change. After experimentation, it was determined that the old structure was optimal. Turners were introduced to save some work. They then tried to make trapiches that made use of water or wind power. These were a success, and were used by major mills like La Ninfa until the 1840s. Steam trapiches were then tried. Largely, though, trapiches were the same concept but just made out of better materials, and it still was the bottleneck of production.  The Otahití cane also was used as fuel due to its large stalk being much more suitable than earlier varieties. Pans were experimented but were essentially unchanged as well. The aerometer was introduced to calculate the density of the sugar broth. Roads improved and transport to and from Havana was possible. The Cuban slave owner of 1800s is mostly an increase of the scale of smaller, older operations. Modernization was hard and required salaried workers. The intellectual fervour of the oligarchy held few roots after these experiments. The slave owners were not bourgeois, but slave owners. Advancement necessitated the [[Abolition of Slavery]], a step too far. The system was built off of work that was brute and routine. Small owners had pride in their work, large manufacturers slipped in quality. These large manufacturers required European refineries to finish the product, reverting the independent mindset of before. In 1864, a prominent baron admits that all there needs to be learned about the business can be learned in a week. After the 1840s, this work was done by salaried hands; change required a change in organizational structure.
In the 1790s Havana became wildly rich. The Haitian Revolution filled the role of the British capture of Havana, an accelerant to an inevitable movement. In 1792, the purpose of Cuba became sugar, usefulness was profit after all. Money went to artisans, many black, and whites moved to work in the mills. Peasants abandoned their farms due to profit. Workers and lower classes gained in months what should have taken years to earn. Land and ox gained value, and priests occasionally worked in the fields. In 1795, it became de jure illegal to trade with foreign ships but this was ignored. Even a slight dip in profits is treated as cataclysmic. Some call the 1976 recession due to trade, but many American ships still fluttered in Havana. A general Someruelos wished to forbid neutral trade, but saw clearly that sugar was the government of the island and threats to sugar were threats to independence. The extravagance washed away the feudal veils of the brutality of slavery. Flour became hugely important for feeding slaves, and was a corrupt business taken by the oligarchy for profit. This business stored other contraband goods in its barrels, and barrels were corrupted and discarded for worms. The first Dance with Millions rocked the lower classes, blacks were malnourished due to corrupt importation of food and languished from disease. Sugar enriched the top and devestated the bottom.

### Full Citation:
Fraginals, Manuel Moreno, 2001, _El Ingenio_
Tags: #economics #culture/america/cuba #politics/america/cuba #source #time/early-modern-era/1700s #source/spanishlanguage
Dates Read:
Date Created: 12-1-2023
Status: #status/draft