# Foreign Relations of the PRC

## Introduction
China's ascendance in the world constitutes the most important change in the foreign-policy landscape of this century. China is viewed to rise simultaneously as the [[United States]] falls, and calls for better relations or of more confrontation are seen as crucial to the future of both states. This study is meant to show that China's rise will not be as dramatic as often portrayed. Chinese foreign policy is prone to more shifts due to internal political situation than would be found in the consistent, Machiavellian foreign policy it's often attributed. [[Mao Zedong]]'s shifts between revolutionary zeal and contentment with the world order and [[Deng Xiaoping]]'s shifts between a pro-US and [[Soviet Union]] policy left the impression that China was unpredictable. China still shifts between placid development and violence. The study argues that this is a serious barrier to Chinese hegemony.
The study also highlights the extent to which Chinese foreign policy is centered on its periphery, with Asia receiving the most attention by thinkers. The relations with nearby countries are worse than would be predicted from China's impressive engagement with it. This is due both to historical conflict and China's current territorial disputes in the [[South China Sea]] and lack of good relations with [[Japan]] and [[South Korea]]. The Chinese party encourages a lack of reflection on these issues, and Chinese nationalism creates a victim mentality that leads to overreaction. 
Chinese power largely stems from the miraculous growth of the [[Chinese Economy]], which has been the fastest growing major economy since [[Hua Guofeng]]'s and [[Deng Xiaoping]]'s liberalization. The Chinese economy, while hampered by systems of state-owned enterprises and banks, is projected to become the world's largest. China has major relations with developing countries, becoming crucial in Africa, [[Brazil]], and much of Asia, becoming more major than Western-backed international finance. Thus, the idea that China's growth and economy will necessarily lead to a multipolar world comes naturally. China has shown a willingness to invest in military power and to work with multilateral organizations such as ASEAN, BRICS, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. China has worked deeper with the [[UN]] while not following international norms, which grants China more power to take international decisions. China wishes to rise without outside fear, and has successfully improved relations with some states on its periphery. International human rights are only followed up to the point that it would hurt economic growth. This growth coincides with troubles in the developing world, and ideas of power shift belie a time of more world conflict. China's problems of corruption, opaque leadership practices, income inequality, and dependence on resources for economic development alongside the inevitability of slower future growth put China's status as coequal to the US in question. As well, China has not exhibited any influence in world affairs: when has China made a country do something it ordinarily wouldn't? Due to the secrecy surrounding decision making, the extent of these limitations is up to question.
China's image in foreign affairs is not what the government wishes to portray. The stereotypes pushed by the government are often used by foreign journalists, and thus taint both the perception of its effectiveness to the Chinese people and scholars abroad. Chinese foreign-affairs are seen to be consistent, fair, principled, and effective. These writings are useful, but are not proof of the actual behavior of the country. China's principled leadership is immediately up to question, as [[Zhou Enlai]] ignored [[Jawaharlal Nehru]] in stoking border conflict. [[Deng Xiaoping]] both sought to gain support among non-Communist Southeast Asian leaders against [[Vietnam]] to back the [[Cambodia|Cambodian]] [[Khmer Rouge]] while supporting insurgents against the same leaders. [[Pakistan]] and [[Enver Hoxa]] both felt betrayed at various points by Chinese policy changes.
American foreign policy is often seen as arrogant. However, the American process of having open media and debate allows for recognition of failings, whereas Chinese exceptionalism explicitly forbids such recognition in lack of having a true political opposition. Students are not taught about failures in Chinese history and believe that the country follows morally correct policies. 
Disclosing the decision making process is criminal, and thus the analysis focuses on Chinese behavior being primarily interest based. Mao was generally more focused on revolutionary policy whereas Deng and further leaders were more focused on development.  Chinese relations with [[Taiwan]] have cast doubt that China's rise will remain peaceful.
Chinese policy is China-centered. Mao talked of world revolution but almost exclusively focused on China. Deng backed the reviled Khmer Rouge much like Mao backed [[Jiang Qing]] and the Gang of Four. China now focuses on win-win relations, only taking decisions that clearly benefit themselves. China is fervently against any encroachment on its periphery, including [[Taiwan]] and its relations with the US and Soviet backing of Vietnam and India. This toxicity has led to hostility to outside powers.
China, in its education system, is conditioned to think of itself as a victim of imperialism and foreign dominance. They created the idea of one hundred years of foreign affronts to Chinese dignity. This has led to both more national unity and a hindrance in improving relations with the US and [[Japan]]. China is uniquely willing to aligned itself against any perceived enemy, allying with [[Slobodan Milosevic]] of [[Serbia]] in the [[Yugoslav Wars]]. The United States is frequently the main enemy of China, remaining so during the [[Sino-Soviet Split]]. China's policy has frequently been reactive rather than deliberate, even to domestic issues such as the [[Cultural Revolution]]. 
The US and Asia-Pacific are the two focuses of Chinese foreign policy, but China's inconsistency has been a major block in achieving its goals. Most bordering nations have experienced some military conflict with the PRC. Nehru was shocked by border incursion, [[Nikita Khrushchev]] was horrified at Mao's brazen confrontations with the US, [[Ho Chi Minh]] was rebuffed by China in the [[Vietnam War]]. Japan tried to reconcile with China many times due to their shared distrust of the USSR, but China's patriotic unwillingness to cooperate with Japan in the 1990s led to a deterioration of relations that remains to this day, especially due to the [[Senkaku Island Dispute]]. South Korea is dismayed at China's strong support for [[North Korea]]. ASEAN is dismayed by China's unwillingness to concede in the South China Sea. The only region where relations are consistently smooth is Central Asia. Most farther countries have relations only with regards to mutual economic interchange. China's unwillingness to take risks apart from the win-win formula casts doubt on China's ability to influence the world, betraying the idea of an inevitable Chinese ascendance.

## Mao's Changing Course in Foreign Affairs, 49-69
Mao's dominance in foreign affairs meant dramatic swings in relations, ideology vs pragmatism, and internal disarray which spilled into the international arena. The [[Sino-Soviet Split]] turned the USSR from a close ally to a potential military threat between 1950-1969. This led to a closer alignment with the US in the 1970s, previously China's main adversary. The [[Cultural Revolution]] meant the freezing of international relations. Experienced diplomats were cast out of their roles, being replaced with hyper nationalists. Recovering relations meant disagreements which cost the career of senior leaders. In 1969, the Soviet Union threatened to invade China to destroy its nuclear program. This was a wake-up call, which led to the resumption of normal relations with many countries, like the US.
The Chinese communists won the war, faced with the difficult task of consolidating rule. Chinese communists had more experience with guerilla warfare than governance. As America backed the [[Guomindang]], the Chinese sought the support of the Soviets to counteract their influence and to gain economic and technical support. Moscow was Mao's first official trip abroad. Chinese foreign relations of the 50s and 60s are often seen to have been counteracting a wider American containment of the country. Organization, mobilization, and zeal were the Maoists' principle strengths. Thus, other analyses saw Chinese foreign relations as primarily revolutionary, in which case conflict with the US was itself a great tool for mobilization. Both were true, and Chinese foreign policy both could and would dramatically change.
China's foreign policy was motivated first and foremost by its experience in the [[Chinese Civil War]] and thus its primary goal was survival, leading to an inward looking foreign policy. The early CCP showed little knowledge of world affairs, essentially following the [[Comintern]]. It followed when the principle enemy was said to be fascism and not democracy, leading to a worse relationship with [[Imperial Japan]], but also followed in supporting the USSR-German pact of 1939, which directly harmed this goal. It is unclear if this was seen as ideologically correct or practically expedient. However, the movement wasn't entirely anti-US in the 1930s, with some relation building occurring in 1936 with Edward Snow's famous book [[Red Star Over China]]. After [[Pearl Harbor]], efforts again resumed, with [[Zhou Enlai]] trying to convince the Americans to open liaison offices, one of which was eventually made post-World War 2 despite the US's backing of [[Chiang Kai-Shek]], however the US's continued support upon the resumption of conflict made the US an enemy of the PRC.
The [[Korean War]] immediately cast the two in a proxy war. The overall containment strategy of the US guided Chinese foreign policy for the next two decades. The decision of the [[North Korea|North Korean]] government to attack in 1950 caught the US by surprise. The USSR and Chinese were surprised that the US militarily backed the inferior South Korean forces as well. The US also put its navy around [[Taiwan]], to ensure that its government was not overthrown as well. US cultural and business organizations were seized in China. Fighting stopped in 1953, but America continued to use its resources to stymie CCP expansion in the region. China began to provide more support for rebels in [[French Indochina]] and test the waters of the Taiwan strait. Meanwhile, China sought the support of the USSR and Comintern in their nation building, leading to a copying of many Soviet political structures. An experiment in peasant land ownership was ended due to the centralized model used by Moscow to support industrial development. The US containment was seen to be an existential threat: [[Dwight Eisenhower]] threatened the use of nuclear weapons at one point. After the 1954 fall of [[French Indochina]], the US backed [[Southern Vietnam]] while China backed the [[Viet Minh]]. Meanwhile, [[Chiang Kai-Shek]] openly wanted war with the mainland which scared [[Dwight Eisenhower]], partially aided by a general pro-Taiwan sentiment in the US government at the time. In December 1954, Taiwan and the US signed a bilateral defence treaty. US allies were not supportive of Taiwanese brinkmanship but the [[Taiwan Strait Crisis]] of 1955 continued.
However, thawing of relations was enabled by the death of [[Joseph Stalin]] enabling a crop of more open-minded Soviet leaders. They were generally reticent to involve themselves in Asian conflicts. This coincided with a broader hope of productive relations with Europe, Asia, and Africa, and conflict in the Taiwan Strait did not help these goals. It was still alienated from world powers, met with a resolute US and wary ally. It did not immediately accept a ceasefire, but decreased demands over time. Overtures were denied by the US, who hoped to force China into using Soviet aid which the Soviets were unable to supply, which would separate the two countries. Chinese relations with some developing and developed countries improved, but this was slowed down by more radical policies later. 1958 saw the start of a more radical, anti-US decade, while China broke with the USSR in the 1960s. [[Gamal Abdel Nasser]] was seen as a crucial potential ally for China as a key player in the non-aligned movement and general Western skepticism. In 1956, it was the first Middle Eastern country to establish relations with the PRC. However, China's break with the Soviet Union was not followed by Egypt, and its advice to pursue guerilla warfare against [[Israel]] in 1967 was seen as naive. China supported the Soviets in the [[Hungarian Revolution]], but supported the [[Poland|Polish]] government against Moscow in a similar anti-Soviet conflict. It supported Soviet aggression against non-Communist movements but resisted Soviet aggression against autonomy within the Communist system. China showed confidence in taking roles in intra-Communist disputes.
In 1958, China used artillery against a resupply mission from Taiwan, sparking renewed fears of war with Taiwan. There was no preparation for a real naval invasion: the episode was likely to mobilize support domestically during the [[Great Leap Forward]] or to test the USSR. [[Nikita Khrushchev]] ended support for China in 1960, the year of the Sino Soviet Split. [[Leonid Brezhnev]] made the Sino-Soviet border dispute come into focus, with skirmishes in 1969. This withdrawal of support coincided with famine from the Great Leap Forward and threats from Taiwan and [[India]]. 
[[Jawaharlal Nehru]], a key former of the non-aligned movement, initially backed Sino-Indian relations, establishing them in 1954. Nehru cooperated with Zhou Enlai, but was surprised of a Chinese road being built in disputed territory in 1958. In 1959, he allowed the [[Dalai Lama]] to reside in India. 1962 was the low point of Chinese-Indian relations. China backed [[Laos|Laotian]] Communists, [[Nepal]] despite their relations with India, and African countries like [[Zambia]] with [[Kenneth Kaunda]] and [[Tanzania]] with [[Julius Nyerere]]. [[Japan]] was China's most important economic partner in the 1960s. [[Charles de Gaulle]] established relations with China in 1964, showing independence from the US.
The [[Cultural Revolution]] defined China from 1966-1976. Mao lost faith in the Communist party and government, and the military was controlled by [[Lin Biao]], who was instated after Peng Dehuai resisted [[Great Leap Forward]] policies in 1959. Indoctrination was put in front of actual service. In 1966, Mao felt empowered to go against administrative policies he saw as reactionary and capitalist which ran all through the party and government. Lin Biao, security forces led by Kang Sheng, and other radicals backed him in these efforts. Red guards wrecked havoc in urban centers and purges rocked the government. China was disgusted that the USSR was willing to cooperate with the US. It provided military and economic aid to leftist governments and insurgents despite being impoverished and relatively militarily weak. The PRC tried to convince leftist governments to favor it over the USSR. China backed the Burmese Communist Party in 1967 which led an insurgency against its already Communist government for 20 years. It both backed [[Sukarno]] as a nationalist figure against [[Malaysia]] while backing Communist insurgents against him. [[Suharto]] took control of the army in the midst of a pro-Communist coup and led an anti-Communist crackdown. This, and Suharto's eventual leadership of [[Indonesia]], led to the pausing of Chinese relations in 1967. In January and February 1967 Red Guards practically sieged the Soviet embassy, and, later in the year, Red Guards entered and burned Soviet files. Some diplomats were beaten when the USSR recalled them. A Chinese mob burned down the British embassy after tensions in Hong Kong. This was China's low point of international relations.

## Maneuvering Between the US and USSR, 69-89
Brezhnev and the Soviet Union were willing to compel China to follow its lead with its burgeoning power. The threat of war in 1969 lead Mao to curb some parts of the Cultural Revolution in order to search for international allies. The US, reeling from Vietnam, was willing to end containment and search for mutual benefit against the Soviets. The Great Power Triangle dynamic was fraught, with Mao mainly focused on his legacy until his death. He initially searched for more opening with the US, but was later disappointed with [[Zhou Enlai]] and [[Deng Xiaoping]] with their results. Deng Xiaoping, upon becoming paramount leader, wanted to work with Japan, the US, and international finance to develop the country, with internal resistance hurting this goal. China sought to pragmatically form relations between the US and USSR who eclipsed China in influence. By the late 1980s and early 1990s, China was the primary recipient of foreign assistance.
This dramatic opening was at the heels of the peak of Chinese isolation. During the Vietnam War, Maoist China rejected any relations with the US. Some scholars view China's deradicalization as the primary impetus for the establishment of relations, others US thawing on China. What is clear is that the threat of Soviet nuclear war drastically changed China's calculus. Chinese explanations of foreign policy often place domestic factors first due to historic factors, something that factors into these analyses.
After government purges, [[Lin Biao]] and the military gained prominence in governance, partially distracting them from defence tasks. Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia due to deviance was understood in China as a threat: Maoist China was not in lockstep with the Comintern. China accused the USSR of weakness during the [[Cuban Missile Crisis]] and the USSR accused China of weakness for accommodating [[Hong Kong]] and [[Macau]]. Governance was split as to whether to reach out to the US, with Lin Biao and [[Jiang Qing]] with the Gang of Four against and [[Zhou Enlai]] in favor. The latter were in control and thus rebuked [[Richard Nixon]] upon his 1969 election. The Soviets tried to gain assurance of non-intervention in a war against China, possibly including nuclear weapons. The Chinese debate became whether the US was sufficiently weakened from Vietnam to end containment, or whether increasing relations would be a trap for China. Mao seemingly came to agree with talks with the US, but Nixon's invasion of [[Cambodia]] in 1970 led Mao to cancel further rapprochement. Clandestine talks continued, with Edgar Snow being told that Nixon could visit in 1970. This came at the time when Lin Biao was being undermined and the alleged coup attempt was being plotted. [[Marshal Ye]] directly greeted [[Henry Kissinger]] in his 1971 visit. Lin Biao lost this battle, and died two months later after an alleged coup in a plane crash, his clique having lost all power.
Many Western nations opened to China in 1971 and China entered the [[UN]] alongside [[Taiwan]] withdrawing. Mao was upset that the US was unwilling to fully withdraw from Taiwan and that the US sought detente rather than conflict with the USSR. Mao supported Deng Xiaoping gaining the title of foreign policy spokesman in 1974. Three World Theory was backed, that the superpowers formed the first world, developed countries the second, and the third world were crucial allies against superpower hegemony. In practice, China wanted the US to confront the USSR for China's own security. Zhou's death led Deng Xiaoping to give a eulogy before being purged a second time, and the Gang of Four briefly gained power before popular pro-Zhou movements.
Deng Xiaoping gained power in 1978, and with him came a pragmatic, economic and legitimacy focused list of priorities. Meanwhile, [[Gerald Ford]] was domestically weak and the Chinese backed [[Khmer Rouge]] and Soviet backed North Vietnam overwhelmed both US proxies. The Soviet influence over Vietnam and India was another form of containment. In response, China worked with conservative, anti-Soviet leaders like [[Mohammad Reza Shah]] and [[Sese Mobuto]] of Zaire and stopped backing insurgents in many places. [[Zbigniew Brzezinski]] under [[Jimmy Carter]] succeeded in pushing forward Sino-American relations in 1978 and Deng Xiaoping visited the US in 1979 on the eve of a Chinese incursion into Vietnam. Many in Congress did not see the need to break the status quo, but forward progress continued.
The [[Soviet-Afghan War]] of 1979 prompted China to stop considering if the US would allow the USSR to apply military pressure to China. On the eve of Soviet weakness, Brezhnev reached out to China in 1982. While China previously backed developing countries, Deng Xiaoping shrank Chinese aid and instead competed with them for international support. These conditions allowed for a weaker tie to the US. "Independent Foreign Policy" focused on international Communism was instated in 1981, spurred on by disagreements with [[Ronald Reagan]]. US Secretary of State Alexander Haig resigned in 1982, a crucial voice for accommodating Chinese demands. Instead, focus shifted the the US-Japanese relationship among others in East Asia. Some scholarship on Nixon-era foreign relations casts China as the primary potential partner with the US, with Japan and others being seen as secondary, declining players. The deemphasis of China in 1982 may have led to an era of comparatively stable relations. The book agrees with this, saying that China accomidated this new dynamic. China relied on the US for some security and economic modernization and the US did not push China on issues like Taiwan. The US's firmer stance may have strangely boosted Chinese relations, Congress and the public accepted these, and China viewed the US as one of if not the most important topic in foreign relations.
China primarily wished for an international front against Soviet expansionism. This fear of abandonment by the West was assuaged by the strong reaction against the Soviet Afghan War. China's brief pro-Soviet tilt did not work, with 1983 seeing increased Soviet buildup and China's demands worsening US relations. Thus, the Chinese policy once again swung toward being pro-US, now without fear of Western appeasement of the USSR. The reelection campaign seemed to favor Reagan, positive for China as Democrats backed Taiwanese independence, thus China needed to learn to accommodated him. 
Thus, China strongly moderated its demands. It accepted arms deals which were previously on hold due to the Taiwan issue and reduced criticism of US policy. It did not stop the US from engaging in increased arms trade with Taiwan, including Taiwanese purchases of American jets.
[[Yuri Andropov]] was wholly unwilling to stop Soviet expansion in Asia during his brief 1984 reign, and [[Konstantin Chernenko]] in 1985 was even more rigid. There were talks for resuming relations between the two countries starting in 1982, but only secondary issues like trade saw any progress. Andropov was to visit after Reagan, but this was delayed due to more disagreements. Chernenko backed [[Mongolia]] and [[Vietnam]] against China and deployed aircraft carriers nearby Chinese waters. Meanwhile, China increased anti-Vietnamese action, leading to a nadir in relations. American confidence against the Soviets alongside Chinese insecurity meant that the relationship was crucial for Beijing. [[Mikhail Gorbachev]] seemingly led a resumption of normalized ties. Initially, there were disagreements over Asian security, but Gorbachev eventually backed out of Afghanistan, Mongolia, and other periphery countries, leading to less worry of Soviet attack. Economic factors replaced security factors as the primary motivation for Sino-Western ties. Gorbachev's improvement of US-Soviet relations led China to wish to do the same. The US found the Soviets even more accommodating than China, and that Chinese disapproval of US-Soviet ties were unimportant, thus other issues, like the treatment of [[Tibet]] and human rights, again crept up in American foreign policy.
Outside of the US and USSR, Chinese relations were meant to boost development and prestige. It was willing to work with Japan, [[South Korea]], and [[ASEAN]]. It worked with Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America but avoided costly projects. In the arms industry, it spurred the Pakistani nuclear program, sold arms to [[Saudi Arabia]], and sold arms to both [[Iraq]] and [[Iran]] during the [[Iran-Iraq War]]. China tried to avoid controversy and maintain relatively good relations with as many countries as possible.

## Chinese Foreign Relations after the Cold War
The [[Fall of the Soviet Union]] meant that, for the first time, China had no immediate security threat in the 1990s. Crackdown against the [[Tiananmen Square Massacre]], however, was unanticipated. Originally, they expected the West to normalize relations within months, but the overall collapse of the Eastern Bloc led to some Westerners questioning the Chinese regime. The US sanctioned and criticized China in the late 1980s to early 1990s, and thus was now as much a threat as partner. China boosted their military and used foreign relations to boost its image. Criticism of Chinese communism was construed as an affront to Chinese nationalism, similar to the Western-led [[Century of Humiliation]]. Deng's Southern Tour of 1992, meanwhile, encouraged increasing international economic cooperation. The economic growth of China caught the world's attention even as it caused some domestic problems. 
[[Jiang Zemin]] furthered the goal of boosting economic growth as a tool of governmental legitimacy. China's neighbors and the US were vital for economic growth, especially the latter's consumption of Chinese exports. China worked with international finance and occasionally deferred to world pressure on important international affairs, for instance signing the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. China wished to meet the world's expectations on narcotics trafficking, terrorism control, and environmental preservation. China continued to funnel weapons to [[Iran]], North Korea, and [[Pakistan]] despite pressure from the West. Chinese foreign policy is handled on a case-by-case basis, and economic globalization was generally seen as positive. China maintains a balance of power view on security issues and begrudgingly accepted multilateralism on some economic and trade issues. Multipolarity was temporarily overshadowed by multilateralism as a tool to decrease US influence. Fears of containment persisted and were frequent causes of international disagreement. US Asian policy was generally seen as against China, and strong action is taken to resist a supposed US hegemony.
Jiang Zemin adopted a more flexible Taiwan policy, although this was upset by visits and disputes in 1995-6. He generally advanced Deng Xiaoping's policy. Jiang's overall weaker position than Deng Xiaoping did not stop him from taking an active interest in foreign affairs, especially on the eve of [[Hong Kong's Transition to Chinese Rule]] in 1997. Despite the [[Asian Economic Crisis]] of 1997-8, Jiang Zemin set out on reforming state owned enterprises to be more efficient and prop up Chinese financial institutions. Jiang Zemin had a capable team in 1997-8, but multilateralism historically led to conflict in CCP governance, a fact acknowledged by the group. Economic policy was uncontroversial despite resistance from reformed industries, as China wished to join the [[WTO]]. These reforms caused social unrest, a cause of the continued repression of dissonance to this day. With this situation, international policy was less important as domestic reform, helped by generally positive US and periphery relations. 
External variables were crucial to China's future, although the prevailing academic view was that China was resilient enough to survive anticipated problems. In the first decade of the 2000s, China was reticent to directly compete with the US, but in the second, boosted by a large economy and military, it was more willing to alienate relationships with the US and periphery. 
Jian Zemin and [[Hu Jintao]] both continued an institutionalisation of Chinese governance, a factor in its increasing predictability at the time. Hu was relatively competent in dealing with North Korean nuclear missile development and the [[2008 Financial Crisis]]. Meanwhile, [[Xi Jinping]] is more willing to pursue a bold foreign policy than his previous two predecessors. His unprecedented strength is largely due to the willingness to use propaganda and take bold steps like a widespread anti-corruption campaign which rooted out much of his political opposition. He has built Chinese finance to dominate Eurasia and has displayed flagrant brinkmanship in Taiwan and use of military force to coerce neighbors.
The growth of civil society post-Mao and the growth of state capitalism led Jiang Zemin to invite the wealthy to help with governance. The acceptance of civil elites stabilized decision making. The military has lost political sway and leadership struggles continue under secrecy, as in Xi Jinping's leadership struggle with [[Li Keqiang]].
The story of modern China is that of economic growth, a rapidly growing, competent labor force backed by improved technology and infrastructure. Foreign trade, investment, and science exchange was at this growth's heart. Hu wished make the economy more reliant on domestic consumption rather than foreign exports. Governmental safety nets were low, and artificially low interest rates benefited banks lending to SOEs but hurt savers, thus hurting consumption. 2008-2010 saw decreased Western demand and thus high unemployment, thus the government began giant infrastructure projects. Old institutions for economic planning made way for many ministries for foreign trade and relations. Low level bureaucrats often altered economic plans against the wishes of central governance, a decentralization which initially benefitted growth, something that often occurred when central authorities wished to curb development programs for environmental, equity, or other concerns. 2007-8 quality controversies with pet and baby food seriously damaged Chinese credibility. In this time, some demonstrations of social discontentment occurred, with more than 80,000 in 2005. Currently this is not a threat both because of a lack of a unified anti-CCP front and diligence in suppressing dissidence.
China wishes both to have acceptable relations with the US while moving towards a multipolar world. The War on Terror boosted US global security involvement around China as well, furthering fears of encirclement. 
Regime stability is the primary issue for the PRC, and experts disagree whether it is likely to survive. Its coercion and power mean that it is likely to resolve its considerable pressures. Popular support, unity, and economic growth are all necessary to maintain power. The regime has enough popular support without an obvious replacement, and relatively smooth leadership transitions mean that stability has so far been a theme of the 2000s.
Crisis would be more likely if leadership transitions were not as stable as the last three. Civilian leaders currently have the obedience of the military, but this could change. The size of the CCP mean that struggles between internal organizations are commonplace. Personal networks are at the key of Chinese politics, which is a threat to long-term stability. 
International threats have moved from security to that of Chinese stability. China has been unmoved by international criticism to cease crackdowns on dissidents. Cultural cross-polination and exposure to global business cycles complicate these dynamics.
Chinese foreign affairs priorities are long shots and not a priority for the regime in comparison to regime survival. Modernization, perpetuation of power, and unity with Taiwan are the key points. China wishes to be the Asian power and a globally relevant country. Chinese views of multipolarity were changed in the 1990s, with belief that, in the short-term, the US was the sole superpower, but Chinese recovery from 2008 led many to believe that the eve of a multipolar world was nigh. This enabled China to be more confrontational, which was often counterproductive. Some situations saw a dovish China, others a confrontational one, leading some observers to comment on fractured policy since 2011. Xi Jinping's rule saw an orientation toward [[Vladimir Putin]] and [[Russia]] and a creation of a local anti-US order. Marxist thought perpetuates in Chinese fears of Westernization and the focus on one enemy. Xi has been active in trying to make the rules of the 21st century. 

### Full Citation:
Sutter, Robert G. _Foreign Relations of the PRC_. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2013.

Tags: #history/asia/china #asia/china #politics/china #politics/foreign-relations #time/modern-era/1900s #time/modern-era/2000s #opinion-piece #source
Dates Read:
Date Created: 5-11-2022
Status: #status/draft