# Hua Guofeng

## Before Becoming Chairman
Hua Guofeng replaced [[Deng Xiaoping]] as vice chairman in 1975 due to fallout from his Tsinghua controversy compounded by [[Zhou Enlai]]'s death. Hua had a 20 year relationship with [[Mao Zedong]], but was very unfamous. This choice was almost certainly due to Mao's paranoia of having a successor undo his legacy and surpass him, a real possibility with Deng but not so much with this unknown official. He was a known moderate who criticized Lin Biao but was instated in power before the [[Cultural Revolution]] and the zealous officials that followed in its wake. [[Jiang Qing]] and the Gang of Four welcomed his replacement, as he was seen as far more malleable than Deng. Hua was in no way a brilliant leader, but he brought stability at a time when it was sorely needed, as Hua was always a compromiser, seeking to offend as few people as possible. During the instability of Zhou Enlai's death, Mao Yuanxin deeply criticized Deng Xiaoping's economic plan, which Hua Guofeng also did, albeit more moderately.

## As Chairman
During Mao's decline in health, Hua gained near-full control of the country, and Mao expressed hope that other officials would recognize him as Mao's successor. Hua blocked [[Jiang Qing]]'s efforts to remove Deng from the [[Chinese Communist Party]], a sign of the tension to come between the two, due to the latter's jealousy in Hua's unquestioned position of greater power. Hua, like himself, built coalitions and garned wide and tepid support, not controlling the bureaucracy with the same ability that Deng did. In the wake of Mao's death, Hua was critical in the effort to jail the Gang of Four, and thus helped end the radical Maoist coup attempt. Hua also had control over Mao's funeral and published a version of _Mao's Selected Works_, giving him a clear role in the legacy of the late leader.
Hua Guofeng was a mild-mannered, cautious leader. Picked due to being a relatively competent and innofensive successor to Mao, he had a side of being a true reformer. He, not Deng, instituted the [[Special Economic Zones]] and was as zealous as Deng for foreign technology. Hua's policy of the Two Whatevers (whatever Mao's policy and whatever Mao's instructions they should be followed) served to place him as a successor to Mao's legacy, not a usurper. 
Hua had far less preparation than Mao to rule over China, as Mao had been preparing during the entire revolution to rule, and thus relied on esteemed Marshall Ye for military support and Li Xiannian for economic support. Both were not democratic reformers nor zealous Marxists, and thus were perfect candidates for advisors during such a transition period. Hua's main source of power was his backing from Mao and his titles, and thus Marshall Ye pushed for more formal political processes. While Hua sought to build a cult of personality like Mao, this mostly failed, and thus a formalization of roles would give Hua institutional power, especially important due to the fact that Mao ruled entirely by personality and the processes of government, at the time, mostly functioned as rubber stamps. In 1978, faced with mounting pressure by [[Deng Xiaoping]], it was clear that Hua would never hold the same reverence as Mao, especially due to his young age and lack of experience in the revolution.
Hua Guofeng's crucial policy was the Two Whatevers: "We will resolutely uphold whatever policy decisions made, and unswervingly follow whatever instructions Chairman Mao gave." This served to place Hua as a continuer of Maoist thought, and not be accused of de-Maoization.
Hua Guofeng convened the 11th Party Congress to consolidate power, and supported Deng Xiaoping's Four Modernizations and an active approach to the economy.  Hua also sought to remedy his lack of knowledge of foreign policy, going from knowing little and leaning on party slogans to being a competent thinker in 1978. In 1978, Hua visited Romania and Yugoslavia and was convinced by them that socialist countries could open to foreign trade and currencies while maintaining sovereignty.
Hua, while having pressure to reinstate Deng Xiaoping into power, did not stop Deng Xiaoping's mandatory self-critisms upon assuming power. During the 1977 Central Party Work Conference Hua sought to discuss broad political issues, but was confronted by some high-ranking officials.  Within the government, senior officials who were victimized by the [[Cultural Revolution]] continually gained power, and they, by in large, supported Deng. Deng refused to support the Two Whatevers, even in negotiations for his return, and Hua reinstated Deng upon a letter affirming his belief that Hua should be leader, which was made to be formal in the July Plenum. Deng Xiaoping had near-complete control of the military due to his being Chief of the General Staff and his relationships with officers, and the article published by Deng's Central Party School's Journal _Theoretical Trends_ "Practice" directly challenged Hua's rule. This was unacceptable to Hua and Hua allies who criticized Deng and his allies who allowed it to be published without warning, setting the stage for conflict between the two.
In the wake of a liberal attitude after visits to foreign countries by high level diplomats, the political atmosphere galvanized against Hua. Deng visited the Northeast, directly supporting "Practice" and repudiating the Whatevers. Hua called the Central Party Work Conference, ostensibly to discuss development and agriculture. What ensued was a broad repudiation of the Two Whatever's, Hua's veto of pardons of victims of the [[Cultural Revolution]], and his maintenance that the April 5th incident was counter-revolutionary. Officials spoke about sweeping reforms and Mao was criticized implicitly. Hua Guofeng almost completely reversed his course after being advised by Marshall Ye to follow the times. He signed books supporting the April 5th incident after newspapers independently labeled it revolutionary and said it as such, he backed liberalization and did not push his whatevers, and he also said he believed in "Practice". Some of those who previously backed him launched self-criticisms. Although Hua maintained his titles after the Third Plenum, [[Deng Xiaoping]] was leader. The relationship was superficially courteous but tense; while Deng had more power, intraparty democracy advanced by Marshall Ye and Li Xiannian and Hua's allies meant that Hua maintained some power.
## Hua as a Titular Leader
Hua continued to lose power, with many of his crucial allies being forced to self-criticize in the Conference on Theoretic Principles. The Democracy Wall Movement, supported by Deng and allies initially, began to criticize Hua's restrictive policies. At this point in 1978-1979, public sentiment clearly was against Hua's brand of Maoism.
Hua was largely quiet in his last days in nominal power, largely supporting the party line. Upon the Fifth Plenum in February 1980, Hua's crucial allies, such as Wang Dongxin, were formally criticized and removed from power. Beginning in 1979 Deng began to take control over formerly shared responsibilities, and although Hua remained titular premier he was even openly disrespected in meetings. Deng, for his part, refrained from openly criticizing Hua early in his power, but was open in rebuking the Two Whatevers. After resigning as premier in August 1980, he was stripped of his chairmanship and leadership in the Central Military Commission in June 1981. Hua was criticized by [[Hu Yaobang]] as part of the reassessment of Chinese history for towing too close to Maoist class-struggle policies and for his refusal to reinstate party officials. In fact, 


## References:
[[Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China]]

Tags: #asia/china #history/asia/china #politics/china #world-leaders/asia/china #communism #time/modern-era/1900s
1-11-2022
Status: #status/draft