# Background
Jainism is focused on the removal of negative karmas which prevent the soul from ascending, and focuses on 24 jinas who successfully ascended and have no more presence on earth. Jainism has a particular emphasis on non-violence as a source of removing these karmas, including [[Vegetarianism]] and walking so as to not squish bugs. Jinas are inaccessible models of perfection, whereas deities are more approachable. Jainism is split between Digambaras, sky clad (nude), and Svetambara, white clad, which denote the differences in clothing between renunciants, which belies a serious difference in the role of a mendicants (is clothing causing harm to the world, can women achieve salvation). Svetambaras have an internal division between Martipujakas who worship jina images in temples and the Sthanakavasis and Terapanthis who do not. Of the twenty-four jinas (arhats and tirthankaras), only two have direct proof of existence. 

## Cosmology and Cosmography
Jaina cosmology differs from [[Hinduism]] and [[Buddhism]] in saying that there is no beginning or end of the universe and that it was not created by any god. The universe is depicted as having astronomical size, far too large to comprehend, which is mirrored in Jaina visual forms. There is a world of existence (loka) and non-existence (aloka). The universe is often depicted as an hourglass or human. There is a level for various hells, then the human world, then heavens. Human beings are born and liberated in a central universal island (often represented in temples with four groups of thirteen temples), with a gigantic mountain, Mount Meru, which is often worshipped in temples in statue form. Samavasara are teaching halls of Tirthankara after gaining enlightenment, and are often copied in architectural design, similar to that of Meru temples but featuring a prominent tree under which the jina sat. No matter what, every Jain temple, symbolically, is a replica of the samavasara.

# Worship in Jainism
## Background
Temple worship is not mandated in [[Jainism]], however temples are a site for [[Puja]], worship of figures and objects. The figures depicted are not what are being worshipped, but rather their perfected qualities are, and thus even gods and goddesses participate in statue worship. Worship is highly internal, but priests are still often employed. Contemplation of a statue does not take place like in [[Temples in Hinduism]]: as Tirthankaras have shed all ties to the world they cannot respond to earthly calls. Still, worship can destroy bad [[Karma]] (papa) and create merit (punya). Statues are sometimes anointed and washed with various materials in worship. Circumambulation around icons is utilized similarly to [[Hinduism]]. Sacred texts, prayers, and hymns venerate jinas. Worship is ordinarily done alone, and thus temple worship is centered around special events. Special phrases, mantras, and sacred figures, yantras, are used. Gaining an accurate understanding of the universe is a precondition to moksa, with cosmology and cosmography being major fields of study in Jaina tradition.  

## Temples
Jain temples, much like Hindu temples, use architectural design to embody their view of the cosmos, and these patterns and themes can be interwoven and multiplied to create intricate temples. Jain temples often are in close proximity to one another, and thus form temple cities, which have no non-religious structures. Hall temples are a modern design made with one, large, room of worship, which are sometimes surrounded with smaller structures, embodying multiplicity. Some temples, meanwhile, are embedded in neighborhood blocks. Shrine-motifs will often be stacked on top of each other, with statues and image pavilions scattered on each level. Replicas of Mount Meru, a mythical holy mountain, are often used in ritual celebrations of the lives of the jina. Nandisvaradvipa, a mythical island continent only accessible by gods, is often replicated in Jain temples as a way of bringing it to worshippers, and thus rituals performed there are brought to the human world by these temples.
Jain temples are characterized by their multiplicity, of icons, of shrines, of temples in a city. New temples will even make vacant additions to leave room for expansion. It is seen that having more sacred images in a space increases their power on people in it. Beings that are approachable fill in the gap left by the 24 jinas that have left the world. Religious giving funds the number of statues as well. Multi-storyed and underground temples may have also been for defence against attackers in early war.

## Pilgrimage
While pilgrimage is not required of Jains, it is popular. Groups are regularly formed, often with the inclusion of an ascetic. Jains, like Hindus, have the concept of tirthas, or inherently sacred places. They are mostly centered around the great moments of a particular jina's life (conception, birth, renunciation, enlightenment, death (moksa)). Through miracles, donations, and teachers, even small temples can become major sites of pilgrimage. Most are in the Northeast, with the state of [[Bihar]] containing the most important sites.

## Statues
In Svetambara worship, statues generally have external eyes which are missing in Digambara statues. Temples in both are more important due to their images of jinas than as a building in and of itself. Some say that eyes harm the icons, others say they are garish, others that eyes show jinas as outwardly focused, against their status as renunciants. Eyes are affixed to other deities in the Svetambara tradition as well. Eyes are made by all sorts of people, even Muslims, but affixing is done by temple employees. Eyes were depicted on statues in early Jainism, but their status as external eyes is up for debate, as well the question as to whether they were painted remains. Some offerings to icons may have been permanent as well, such as cloth and jewellery, including eyes (there was controversy whether eyes or cloth should be given). These gifts increased thefts at Jain temples, and thus stopping them was a matter of conservation, and affixing them hurts the statues themselves. Others say that eyes show that jinas are looking at worshippers.

## Worship
Worship is not just reserved for jinas or for Jain deities, but also non-Jain deities unbound by Jain ideas of non-violence. Worshippers purify themselves before puja. External ideas of ritual are far less important than the internal spiritual transformation, and thus priests do not perform rituals as transformation is inherently internal, instead they assist laypeople in performing ritual.  They are called pujari, the same word for priests in Hinduism. Jains are not meant to acknowledge others during daily ritual in any other way, although other forms are communal. In regular puja, idols are often bathed, in water, in milk, or in a complex mixture of milk, ghee, sugar, and spice. Some worshippers bow before idols in normal work clothes as well. Often things like sweets, rice, or money are offered as well, often arranged in a swastika (representing the four types of birth, human, heaven, animal/plant, hell). Arti, the waving of an oil lamp in front of an idol, is another form of ritual that is sometimes combined in daily puja. The rite of veneration is a deeply old and linguistically intertwined series of texts. This idea of veneration may have influenced bhakti in other Indian religions.

## References:
Hegewald, Julia, Sacred Place and Structured Space, 2009
Hegewald, Julia, Images and the Cosmos
Laidlaw, Humphrey, Archteypal Actions of Ritual, 1994
Cort, John, The Rite of Veneration in Jaina Images (excerpt from Religions from India in Practice)
Cort, John, God's Eyes: The Manufacture, Installation, and Experience of External Eyes on Jain Icons

Tags: #religion #culture/asia/india 
25-1-2023
Status: #status/draft