# Jiang Qing
## Jiang Qing's Political Life
Jiang Qing was head of the radical Gang of Four (including Wang Hongwen, Zhang Chunqiao, and Yao Wenyuan), a group of reactionary Maoists.  Jiang was Mao's wife, and thus gained prominace in politics.
## Jiang Qing's Relationship with Deng Xiaoping and Hua Guofeng
Jiang Qing's political career was largely centered around opposing [[Deng Xiaoping]]'s reformist agenda and Zhou Enlai, beginning from opposing his appointment as vice-premier of the state council.  This opposition lead Mao to temporarily push her aside.  Jiang Qing, throughout Mao's rule, had control over the propaganda wing of the party, and so she mobalized newspapers and radio against Deng Xiaoping, especially as his de-facto rule in 1975 as Vice Premier and State Council Chairman.  Jiangqing often criticized Deng's lukewarm support of the cultural revolution and his economic practices, which she viewed as bourgeois.  Jiang Qing alluded to [[Water Margin]], saying Deng Xiaoping was like the unzealous Song Jiang, which also went too far in Mao's eyes.  After Deng's third fall from grace in late 1975 and early 1976, Jiang Qing was invited to Pulitburo meetings where she criticized Deng, particularly in relationship with the Tsinghua reform which Mao opposed.  Deng went through Jiang to appologize to Mao, which she refused.  However, during the movement to praise Zhou Enlai after his death, former Red Guard members criticized Jiang Qing, seen as the opposing force to Deng and Zhou's sensible reforms.  She and the Gang of Four temporarily controlled outcry, but millions went to Tiananmen to show their support, which had to be put down using a militia.  Jiang Qing hoped to expel Deng from the Communist Party, which Mao refused to do and [[Hua Guofeng]] explicitly blocked.  After Mao's first heart attack and death, she sought to build alliances, especially with militia members.  This attempt to gain power was not supported by Mao and was hopeless. 
Hua Guofeng, [[Marshal Ye]], and other members of the Hua government were afraid of a potential coup, and Jiang Qing was arrested on October 6.  While supporters were possibly planning to stage an armed revolt, the hostage taking of prominant Gang of Four allies diffused this possibility, alongside the recognition that Jiang Qing and her radical [[Maoism]] was vehemently disliked by the majority of the Chinese people.
## References:
[[Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China]]

Tags: #history/asia/china #asia/china #politics/china #time/modern-era/1900s #world-leaders/asia/china #communism 
7-1-2022
Status: #status/unrefined 