# Hua Guofeng

## Youth and Position Under Mao
Marshal Ye followed [[Mao Zedong]] and Zhou Enlai in [[Sun Yatsen|Sun Yatsen's]] formation of the [[Guomindang]], and as such had deep relations with many important [[Chinese Communist Party]] leaders. During the revolution he was criticized for being too soft on local landlords. During Mao's rule, Ye was relied upon as he was a stable and experienced military man without too much personal ambition. Marshal Ye Jianying served alongside [[Zhou Enlai]] as Vice Chairman after the Lin Biao incident, as a mature and experience counterbalance to the rebel Wang Hongwen. His importance for controlling the military was often shared with [[Deng Xiaoping]], and he invited Deng to chair meetings in Mao's stead when invited to.  During the wider souring of opinion of Deng, Marshal Ye was also criticized and removed from power in the Central Military Commission. Upon the Gang of Four gaining more prominence, he, with the backing of others including [[Hua Guofeng]], moved to arrest [[Jiang Qing]] and its other members without causing military chaos. Ye moved to support Hua Guofeng's leadership in the aftermath.

## Kingmaker under Hua
Ye, alongside Li Xiannian for economy, was crucial in allowing a relatively weak and inexperienced Hua Guofeng to rule China. He pushed for formal procedures and titles to have more power, part of a longstanding tradition against one-man, personality based rule. This would have enabled Hua to govern more effectively due to his lack of deep relationships and sway. Marshal Ye was also critical in reinstating Deng Xiaoping's roles in the CCP, finding that the Gang of Four unfairly incriminated Deng for the April 5th incident.  Upon returning, Deng was third in command while Ye was second. Ye maintained good relationships with both Deng and Hua, and advised Hua, under the tension between "Practice" and the Two Whatevers, to bend to the political times. During the Party Work Conference Hua relented on a large portion of his platform, but this was not enough to win favor. Deng had wide party support, Chen Yun had personnel and economic control, and Ye had power over the military. Ye met with Deng to discuss Deng's ascension as paramount speaker and eventually paramount leader, where both agreed that Deng should allow intraparty democracy and not seek absolute power.

## Under Deng
Marshal Ye was broadly sympathetic to the need of opening speech during 1978-1979. He, alongside Hu Yaobang, supported the Democracy Wall movement. Ye's most important contribution to the discussion about [[Democracy in China]] was the convening of the Conference on Theoretical Principles, in order to unify the ideology of the CCP. This conference led to open discussions on how to reform Chinese democracy, which some leaders viewed as pushing the envelope too far. Eventually, however, Xiannian and Yun were more persuasive in saying that Democracy had gone too far, and Deng clearly limited open speech. Ye was unable to reconcile the differences between the two factions using open dialogue.
Ye gave a seminal speech analysing the PRC's history on the thirtieth anniversary of Communist governance. Crucially, it acknowledged the grave errors of the [[Great Leap Forward]] and [[Cultural Revolution]]. Ye was never criticized by Mao and was close to Zhou and the modern military, and thus was an ideal candidate to give such an assessment. His speech stated that China's growth coincided with public education, called the [[Anti-Rightist Campaign]] a mistake, and said that the country was overzealous in collectivization. The Cultural Revolution allowed Lin Biao and the Gang of Four to rule in terror. Ye indirectly implicated Mao in committing some of these errors as well, the first such acknowledgement. Ye also praised Mao's ending of revolutionary class struggle and hoped that the country would unite for economic modernization. The speech was well received, seen as a rare sign of humility from PRC governance by many elites.  Ye was one of the few officials to speak out in favor of Hua Guofeng, hoping that Deng could serve under Hua and thus opposed his weakening. This was unpopular and Ye did not strongly support Hua, and undertook a mild self-criticism for this position.

## References:
[[Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China]]

Tags: #asia/china #history/asia/china #politics/china #military #communism #time/modern-era/1900s
1-11-2022
Status: #status/draft