# Plantation Futures
The discovery and handling of an unmarked grave of slaves in [[New York City]] underscores the lack of value that slaves had in colonial society. The bodies were still there while New York built up and grew, a reminder of the sacrifices made for modern society against slaves' will. The built environment is thus inextricably linked with slavery in America. The author argues that the plantation tracks to the prison and underprivileged urban areas.
Plantations were built atop an undervaluing and underdevelopment of black life. George Beckford argued that the plantation gave North American metropolis's their wealth, and the scars of chattel slavery persisted far beyond independence and [[Abolition of Slavery]], and thus the idea of a plantation is not confined to one place or time, but rather a systemic underdevelopment of black life. Thus, prisons, cities, resorts, are, in a way, modern plantations, and along with slavery comes resistance via direct and indirect, cultural means. The perspective of plantations being central to systemic racism is not new, with thinkers like [[W. E. B. Du Bois]] touching on it. The plantation normalized brutal violence which has echoed and compounded with time. Plantations are not exclusive causes of past or present trauma, is a place that can serve as an example of black life, much like how cities harbor the most marginalised today. Plantations are self-sustaining, and thus reimagining their future can lead to broader societal effects.
Colonial projects started with ideas of "uninhabitability," lands that housed populations that were seen as damned by colonists. Literary examples include the island in [[The Tempest]] by [[Shakespeare]]. The inhabitants of these lands were seen as barbarians, uncivilised. The idea of "Old" and "New" world cast aside the Americas and Africa as inferior to Europe. Europe, a civilized continent, expanded into empty lands that were tagged as uncivilised but were inhabited by people. Thus, the idea of racial logic was termed as a justification of colonialism. Space was racially and sexually divided, albeit with some overlap, with segregation and indigenous plantations for examples. This carving of space dehumanized black lives. Impoverished communities today live in toxic, polluted, decayed areas separated from that of normal life. The historical construction is that these are not people's lands, forcing some to live the unlivable. Places outside of the capitalist-life support system, primarily in the "Global South," are categorised as outside of a broad, Western, "live" world. There are plenty of pleas to "Save Africa," thereby condemning a whole continent; identity and place are thus inextricably interlinked.
The plantation was the pinnacle of black dehumanization and resistance. Black people were planted into the Americas as helpers of a commodity economy, not people. Black forced labor underpinned the development of towns in the Americas, into becoming inhabited places. Slaveholders employed architecture as a way to control their human chattel, another sign of built environment oppressing black lives. If we stop considering the plantation as a normal mode but instead recognize it as divergent, different, an ugly blueprint for the modern economy, could the modern world of racialized violence change.
The plantation rose with the novel, two modes of worldmaking. Culture normal agent's feeling about reality are completely unempirical. The plot, the plantation, show how land and nourishment can sustain alternate worldviews. These worldviews were inherently linked with the brutality of the plantation.
By directly pointing out racial violence, one can turn attention to life, by turning attention to the violence of the city, one recognizes the struggle against death.

### Personal Doubts
I like the thesis of the article, but I don't necessarily buy the supporting evidence. I would be convinced if...

The Old/New world difference had some intention to separate a better Europe from inferior America. This does not seem to be supported.
Racial logic being a impulse to slavery. I don't doubt this, and I strongly believe it was fortified in colonialization, but there is no backing evidence for a sweeping claim.
Did European explorers believe that these lands were truly that non-existant and unpopulated?
Who is condemned? The author seems to make broad claims about what is constructed, but very little about what this constructed, racially unjust framework of the world actually is and who believes it.
The idea that the man in human geography is necessarily a western, wealthy citizen is extraordinarily strange.
STRONG OBJECTION TO LINKING OF NOVEL-PLANTATION: HIGHLY EUROCENTRIC [[Journey to the West]], or, stretching the definition, Mahabharata. World making is a human impulse and linking the two is not an argument, there is no evidence that it is made to justify the same framework. Can it shoot down "in the colonial era, rising literacy and increased wealth among the privileged classes led to an increased democratization of the human desire of storytelling."

### Counter-source Verdict
I agree that most of the things mentioned are trends, but I think the author vastly overestimates the scale that these trends have on actual consciousness. It is clear that places and people are dehumanized and I like the argument, but I find this source wholly unconvincing of the argument given an open-minded but unideological reader. There are too many points where I wish for actual quotes or evidence but wide, powerful statements are made with nothing propping them up. I buy the points specifically about the plantation economy. To me it smacks of a gospel, telling a mode of thinking of the world, and a powerful mode at that, but makes no attempt to stress-test the theory.

### Full Citation:
McKittrick, Katherine, Plantation Futures, Small Axe, Duke University Press 2013;
Tags: #source #countersource #economy #inequality #literary-theory #literature 
Dates Read:
Date Created: 16-1-2023
Status: #status/draft