# Sino-Soviet Split

## Early History
In foreign policy, dependence on one man, [[Mao Zedong]], instead of institutions meant that China would quickly alter its alliances and enemies. Instead of being Marxist-Leninist, China was [[Maoism|Maoist]], an expression of Mao’s particular view of third-worldism. Much like [[Cuba]], it wished to be seen as independent from the Soviet sphere, a power in its own right.

At the beginning of the socialist experiment, it was natural that domestic policy, reforming and rebuilding China, took precedence over foreign policy. The [[Soviet Union]] were a natural partner for the burgeoning Chinese state. Chinese revolutionaries did not have the requisite governing experience, especially as it was a mostly rural force. So, the Soviets were seen as a potential partner for international economic and technological aid. The Sino-Soviet alliance was thus born in 1950 amid Mao’s first international visit. The focus of this alliance was fear of American containment of China, with American allies stretching much of China’s periphery. The result was a broad tendency to follow the [[Comintern]] in foreign affairs, including a denunciation of capitalist countries such as [[Japan]], which suited Chinese nationalism at the time.

Despite this initial tendency toward the USSR, Sino-American relations never reached the toxicity of Cuban relations. During the Chinese Civil War, an American journalist, Edgar Snow, produced a highly sympathetic work, [[Red Star Over China]]. He was given high access to Mao Zedong and important figures in the [[Chinese Civil War]], thereby “promoting the mutual understanding and friendship of the Chinese and American peoples.” It was only after the continued American support of the [[Guomindang]] after  [[World War 2]] that the [[United States]] became the principal enemy of China. This souring occurred despite attempts by China to establish liaison offices and others by America to mediate between the two sides of the Chinese Civil War. 

The [[Korean War]]was the nadir of Sino-American relations due to the open conflict between the two countries. The failure of either side to achieve victory led to open attempts by both sides to curtail the other’s influence. Fears of American containment led to the backing of rebels in [[French Indochina]] and a reprioritization of unification with [[Taiwan]], culminating in the [[First Taiwan Strait Crisis]] in 1955. These American hostilities led Beijing into Moscow’s orbit. This movement toward Moscow in 1955 coincided with a softening of US-USSR animosity due to the death of [[Joseph Stalin]] in 1953. Thus, the Soviets were unwilling to directly back China in military affairs, leading to China moderating its stance in the Taiwan Strait Crisis. At this time, Soviet relations moderated Chinese ambitions: Moscow was the key guarantor of Chinese sovereignty against American encirclement.

## Changing Tides in Chinese Affairs
In 1958, China was emboldened. Despite backing the USSR in the [[Hungarian Revolution]], it condemned military action against [[Poland]] the same year. Amidst the [[Second Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958]], China,sought to define a form of third-worldism in opposition to Soviet [[Marxism-Leninism]]. It advanced relations with [[Nepal]], a key Asian ally notable for its neutrality in Sino-Indian disputes. It also formed a deep relationship with [[Gamal Abdel Nasser|Nasser's]] [[Egypt]], who advanced his theory of third-worldism and supported revolutionary and anti-colonial projects in Africa. This was a China that wished to be seen as a key player on par with the United States and the Soviet Union.

During this turmoil, the Sino-Soviet Split took hold in 1960. A key factor in this was [[Nikita Khrushchev|Khrushchev's]] [[Destalinization]]. Reformers in the Chinese government, like [[Deng Xiaoping]], were cast aside for fear that the same sidelining could occur to [[Mao's Legacy]]. Likewise, Mao Zedong did not hold the same personal respect for Khrushchev as he did for Stalin. Some argue that radical ideology meant that “Mao was the principal antagonist” in the conflict.

Disputes between the two led to a formal end to Soviet aid in 1960, the beginning of the formal split. China attacked [[India|Indian]] border positions in 1962, thereby attacking a Soviet ally. The [[Cultural Revolution]] led to the low point of Chinese internationalism, with diplomats being replaced with fierce zealots. Demonstrators burned the Soviet embassy’s files in January 1967, recalled Soviet diplomats were beaten and humiliated by crowds of angry youth.

The [[Vietnam War]] severely altered the diplomatic calculus of the region. Coincidentally, the American defeat by the North Vietnamese meant that Beijing saw the Americans as weakened and thus not an existential threat to the regime. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union was unabashedly expansionist, with interests in Asia. The threat of encirclement remained. Now, however, it was the Soviets that were the existential threat, and the Americans were the sole party equipped to deal with them. The [[Soviet Invasion of Czechoslovakia]], a watershed in Cuban acquiescence to the Soviet regime, served as a further reason to part with the USSR for China. Thus, amid internal disagreement, many in the government advocated for a resumption of ties with the United States. 

## After American Normalization
Normalization with the United States predictably occurred during worsening Sino-Soviet relations. In 1969, both countries were on the brink of war due to border disputes. The Soviets were willing to invade Czechoslovakia for deviance; why not an even more deviant China? The Soviets consulted outside powers that it “was in the process of consulting with foreign powers to assure they would stand aside as the Soviet Union prepared an all-out attack on China, including the possible use of nuclear weapons.”

The Sino-Soviet Split was encouraged by aggressive Asian policy by the Soviets. Despite the Chinese initially backing North Vietnam, the country was later seen as a serious threat to Chinese power in Asia, specifically due to China’s backing of the [[Cambodia|Cambodian]] [[Khmer Rouge]], who were opposed by [[Vietnam]]. Much like how the USSR was construed as an imperialist power due to their interventions in Eastern Europe, Deng Xiaoping, and other Chinese leaders saw Vietnam in the late 1970s as bent on controlling Southeast Asia. In 1977, Vietnam joined [[COMECON]], the Soviet-led trade organization. Thus, when Vietnam invaded Cambodia, China invaded border territories in 1979 but could not reinstall the Cambodian government via military pressure. 

Other Soviet interventions in Asia, such as their deep relationship with India and the [[Soviet-Afghan War]], furthered the Chinese sense that the Soviets were an existential risk. Despite a resumption of ties in the 1980s, it is clear that China acted as an independent agent concerning foreign policy, not tied to the USA or USSR, and instead attempted, with mixed success, to pursue its interests.

## References:
Initial article adapted from final essay "Swan Lake No More," detailed citations present.
[[Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China]]
[[Foreign Relations of the PRC]]
Keith, Ronald C. Review of Revisiting Ideology’s Role in the Sino-Soviet Split, by Lorenz M. Lüthi. Diplomatic History 34, no. 3 (2010): 619–22.

Tags: #history/asia/china #history/europe/russia #politics/china #politics/ussr #politics/foreign-relations 
14-5-2023
Status: #status/draft