# The Cuba Reader
## The Death of the Forest
Excerpt from [[El Ingenio]].
Cuba was, at first, a beautifully and diversely forested island. The law of the Indes stated that the forests could not be possessed, but were also the possession of future generations. Before all other commodities the Indes were lands of precious wood. However, the sugar mills needed firewood for their manufacture, and thus the forests were felled. [[Havana]] peasants were paid to clear forests in the late 1700-early 1800s. As [[Slavery in Cuba]] was put under stress, these jobs were delegated to free workers, as slaves often escaped once in the forests. Forests would be chopped, dried, and burnt, to either be destroyed or used as fuel. The right to violate the Law of the Indes was a triumph for the sugar oligarchs. The chopping did not improve the land, but good results only came due to the exceptional soil that was present to begin with. This system was modelled after [[The Antilles]], a system of plundering the richness of the land for profit. In the [[Cuban War of Independence]], yet more forest removal was needed for military means. While this plundering of the forest continued, Cuba imported lumber from the United States. Almost no forests remain today in [[Cuba]] like those that existed earlier.

## Biography of a Runaway Slave
Slaves lived in barracoons, filthy and insect ridden, with non-slave thieves stealing property inside. The housing was separated from the forest. Slaves often had their own small gardens and piglets which were crucial sources of nourishment and money from traders. Even in these conditions there was time for amusement, with tejo and a form of bowling. Mayombe was a game linked to religion, with even whites often believing in these spiritual powers. They would put dirt in a vase to curse their master for wrongdoings. Taverns were places of purchase and relaxation during mornings and evenings. Sundays had the most energy with parties, although [[Chinese Immigration|Chinese Immigrants]] did not participate to nearly the same extent. Slaves made their own drums and played them on Sundays. There were some dances that involved seeing who could endure more hits, and sometimes even masters bet on who would win. There was also a consciousness that blacks were from different areas with different features. There was also generally an infirmary for the slaves, which would handle births. Slave children were raised there until 6/7 years old. Taller slaves were to mate with healthier women, a form of [[Eugenics]]. Women were punished if they did not give birth every year. Curanderas prescribed ways for men to seduce women. Older men were given easier work but were expected to be quiet.

## The Trade in Chinese Laborers
Imported Chinese laborers were sold in a market, with a vendor speaking both English and Spanish. The trade is fully legal, with laborers getting a pitiful sum in exchange for their labor for 8 years. White men brought these Chinese laborers in prisonlike conditions to work in an unfamiliar land. The suicide rate was gigantic among the population. They were considered more intelligent than black slaves and motivated by their eventual freedom. It was unknown in the mid 1800s whether they would mix or leave, and the census hardly noticed their population by 1857. The numbers cited ranged from 60,000-200,000. The trade was wholly unregulated as well.

## Life on a Coffee Plantation
A coffee estate, unlike a sugar plantation, is like a pristine, beautiful garden. They were regularly planted and interspersed with all variety of trees, with flowers in bloom the entire year. 1718 housed the first coffee plantation in [[Suriname]], and the French eventually brought the crop to Cuba. Three or four crops may be ripening on the same tree at the same time, and thus multiple harvests are often needed. The coffee mill was powered by horse or cow, and slaves separated good and bad beans. Small grains produced by old trees, often rejected in Europe, was considered of the highest quality. After grinding, the crop was sent out in January. Young trees are assaulted by parasites, and thus much effort was made to protect the coffee trees. Owners would plant plantains and corn to sell to sugar plantations and foodstuffs like yams and rice for personal consumption. It was a less profitable business than sugar, but did not incur the overwork of slaves and was thus simpler. Slaves in coffee plantations had more time and were able to accrue money to buy their own freedom which was not infrequent. The author argues that slaves were happy in their barracoons.

## Cuba's First Railroad
The first railroad in Cuba connected Havana with Guines, and attempted to connect the capital with important sugar areas. The author spoke to marines in America, and the author, an abolitionist, was shocked to hear their support for [[Slavery in the United States]]. Many prisoners from [[Spain]] were pressed into constructing the railroads.

## The Color Line
Cuba, in the mid 1800s, had 500,000 blacks and 300,000 whites, which the author saw as a threat to Criollo culture. While some believed the ending of the slave trade would decrease this proportion, it was unlikely to. [[Jamaica]] and [[Haiti]] were predominantly black, as was the [[Southern United States]] that bordered Cuba. The author urged for alternatives to slave labor to decrease the population of slaves and free blacks on the island. Free men could harvest in exchange for a cut of the profit, which would free the wealthy to invite more whites to the island and stop the flow of blacks. The author viewed silence of this topic as leading to the death of Cuban society.

## Abolition!
Cuba's location and economy show that it has the capability of becoming a major influence in the world. The colonizers exploited Cuba for their motherland, creating a backward population. [[England]] then introduced the evils of slavery on the land. The will of the people is that of abolition and alternative production. Many are trying to relieve the suffering of the slaves, while tyrannical laws create misfortune for the unfortunate, and blacks are set up to be hated. Cubans are jubilant for their freedom and rights from despotism while slaves watch from the sidelines, creating ideas of liberty or death. Blacks are reticent to celebrate festivals, remaining somber. Constitution, liberty, and equality are antithetical values to slavery. Give freedom to slaves while reimbursing their owners.


### Full Citation:
Chomsky Aviva et al. _The Cuba Reader : History Culture Politics_. Duke University Press 2003.
Tags: #culture/america/cuba #history/america/cuba #source
Dates Read:
Date Created: 15-1-2023
Status: #status/draft 