# The Failure of Political Institutionalization in China
China morphed from the political fervor of [[Mao Zedong]], to the reformist [[Deng Xiaoping]] in both economic and political spheres. Deng Xiaoping was against the "overconcentration" of power in one leader, instead believing in institutionalization. Personalistic leadership means one person is a point of failure, which is where China is shifting under [[Xi Jinping]], despite the market economy and modernization that has occurred. Xi is contrasted with [[Jiang Zemin]] and [[Hu Jintao]], more incrementalist leaders. Seemingly, hijacking Deng Xiaoping's institutionalisation was easy for Xi to upend. Xi rules by leading multiple small groups inside the [[Chinese Communist Party]], 7 of the 18 are lead by Xi Jinping and others are led by allies he knew prior to him becoming the successor to China, in order to bypass bureaucracy. Xi also is ruling over internal security and more actively intervening in the economy, a new development. Xi has clamped down on elite dissent (reminding me of the Arab democracies in [[The Middle East and North Africa's Resilient Monarchs]]) and information flow in order to boost the sense of his popularity. Deng Xiaoping led a decentralizing reform with large buy-in. In 1982, fixed terms and retirement age was a norm broken by Xi. Each Politburo member, in an institutionalised system, has purview over a particular area and is able to collect rents and act through consensus. The "selectorate," emblematic of intraparty democracy, ensures that policies have elite buy-in. Even in the [[Soviet Union]] and [[Vietnam]], Communist parties have eventually led to centralization. In a reciprocal accountability model, the top leaders of the [[Politburo]] are chosen by the leader of China, but the leader is also chosen by these top Politburo members, a similar situation to the [[Pope]] and the [[College of Cardinals]]. No legislature was made by Deng Xiaoping, unlike [[Vietnam]] the legislature is not truly elected and thus has no legitimacy to check authoritarianism. The government was seen as an organ of the party, and if the party is monopolized by one individual then there is no check on power. Secrecy is obligatory for survival as well. The forms of these norms, like the standing committee, are nebulous, with unfixed sizes and roles which were easy to ignore. A princeling generation has supplanted the revolutionary one, and so the legacy of Mao's early China still lives on.

### Full Citation:
Tags:  #politics/china #time/modern-era #source
Dates Read: 9-1-2024
Date Created: 9-1-2024
Status: #status/draft