# The Logic of Comparative Social Inquiry

## Introduction
Most disagreements in comparative research of societies comes at the level of disagreeing on core tenants of models or goals rather than evaluative failures from these models: such disagreements are often not definitively solvable. Certain questions, such as the validity of certain sources, are solvable, while the value judgements of what a science is supposed to be are not (i.e. [[Great Man History]]). Social science research should produce generalizations about social phenomena. For instance, certain core patterns of social behavior are seen, such as development, which allows questions comparing "developed" and "undeveloped" worlds. Societies are not taken as a whole, but cases that illustrate or provide counterexamples to a given theory. The question of whether science should be nomothetic (universalising) or ideographic (only examples are discoverable) is up for debate. Statements in the natural law are simple explanations, while in the social sciences they are inherently spatio-temporal, that is tied to a region and place. Social science necessarily deals with a huge amount of variables with imprecise measurement, making nomothetic statements difficult. Some would say that a multivariate explanation could be universally true, a science of social science that invalidates historical approaches and makes phenomena unlinked to a time and place. Others would say that there are different behaviors regionally, the scale of which may be hyper-local or in larger regions, so we could speak of universal laws in Latin America which would not transfer globally (this seems like the worst of both worlds to me). Clarifying these assumptions leads to tremendous power of comparative inquiry. 
A key goal in analysis is replacing society with a variable: instead of comparing the boiling temperature as unique to NYC and Denver, replace it with a factor, atmospheric pressure, which sufficiently describes the relationship. These comparisons are not global and are not hyperlocal, they occupy a space between. Comparability is non-binary, on some level an apple and an orange cannot be compared, on some level they are both fruits: generalizing language and concepts leads to more comparability (see [[Is Chinese Culture Distinctive]], discussing the ways in which a Christian saint and Confucian sage can be compared). Measurement must be reliable and valid, a precise, extractable description used to explain phenomena. 
Natural science models of inquiry can be used with attention to the uniqueness of social phenomena. Through substituting proper names with variables, nomothetic statements can be made, with uniqueness and universality becoming a problem of measurement. Science is infinitely diverse but describable, social science may be too. Viewing phenomena in systems allow for causes and effects to be relatively isolated in analysis. If systems are seen to be unique, this should be an impetus to find more general factors rather than abandon generalization. 

## Comparative Research and Social Science Theory
Social theory should have generalizability as a higher goal than accuracy, for explanatory, systems-wide power. Facts derive from spacio-temporal relationships, but general rules, like outgroup hostility leading to ingroup solidarity, can be formed to more widely explain social phenomena. Science transforms true statements into true statements using rules, using explanation. Explanation is describing conditions under which an event is always or mostly under, and is necessarily probabilistic, with more inferential rules increasing the probability of a certain conclusion. A theory is a group of one or more rules, interconnected and non-contradictory, and must have some deductive power such that conclusions are non-obvious. Knowledge is the development of new or editing of old theories. An accurate theory has high explanatory power within a set of social phenomena, a general one spans many phenomena, a parsimonious one requires few phenomena to have expressive power. If a general theory spans multiple systems, as in comparative research, then it shows its expressive power.
A bridge between historic and theoretic conceptualization only allows for proper-noun theories to be related to proper-noun theories and theoretic theories with others. Spatiotemporal factors are residual factors in explanations. Proving that systems are isolated, i.e. Incan Civilization or a human being, requires proof that differences within the system are less expressive than those on its border. There are few unique societies and many factors that can explain phenomena, leading to too few degrees of freedom, too few datapoints to truly grasp causality.

## Research Designs
Traditionally, differences are presented before social phenomena they might explain, an alternate methodology of introducing them while explaining the phenomena is available. Random choices of countries is methodologically prohibitive, so a predetermined, quasi-scientific selection is often used instead. Often, the "most similar" groups are used, i.e. the Nordic Countries, to decrease the residua as much as possible. However, truly stating that finding differences is proof of experimental validity understates the amount of differences between similar systems, limiting its use in gaining knowledge. Likewise, if similarities are detected among different societies containing a shared variable, this is occasionally used to validate explanatory power. In this system, once differences arise then systemic differences can be used. Differences are always explained in a level below that chosen, in the case of countries, intra-systems differences are due to communities, in communities, individuals. Comparative research can study and name multiple levels simultaneously. Samples should be chosen to study general human behavior, multistep randomization on different levels would be ideal. If an explanatory variable is found with certain constant variables, the explanatory power in systems without these constants is not guarantee-able. Both most and least similar explanations can fail to provide generalizing knowledge, in the case that least does not find similarities or most does. Anthropology sees societies as probabilistic different, certain cultures tend to produce people of certain personalities, even if a whole scope of human behavior is possible, but empirical evidence for this is not convincing. Quantification and choice of variables can also preclude direct comparison.
Multiple variate analyses can be more interesting, allowing for comparisons between various explanatory variables. For instance, across all countries, education is the most explanatory variable in political position across all countries, with differences cross-nationally being explained by difference in educational attainment. These differences do not necessarily eliminate intra-system differences as well: these new variables need to be controlled for in experimental design. Only in cases of complete reduction of differences post-control can intra-system variation be ruled out.

### Full Citation:
Adam Przeworski and Henry Teune, The Logic of Comparative Social Inquiry, New York: Wiley Inter-science, 1970: Introduction, Chapters 1 and 2 (pp. 1 – 46)

Tags: #culture/asia/china  #source
Dates Read:
Date Created: 14-1-2024
Status: #status/draft