# Toward a Comparative History of Borderlands
Borders are political, imaginary construct to project power. These borders are ignored, despite pleas from governments, whenever convenient, thus taking on a unique life of their own. Both the impact of borders on borderlands and the impact of borderlands on territoriality are studied.
The verbiage used to discuss borders, frontiers, and boundaries, especially cross linguistically, is both an organic extension of concepts of self and otherness but also has latent nuance. Boundaries are often clear lines, political, borders are psychological and regional, and frontiers imply an emptiness on the other side. The universal constant of borders is their use in giving rent to some or in marginalising another. The European model of borders required explicit demarcation with control. The solidifying of borders was used to provide legitimacy to rule over a certain area, formulated in Europe in the wake of a prior tradition of border fluidity. Loyalty on the borderlands, whether non-elite languages were taught, goods smuggled, and militias thrived, depended on state stability and local dynamics, often evolving into a local, autonomous elite given the responsibility to maintain nominal control, especially in Latin America (think of [[Russia|Russian]] Krais). The [[Mexican Revolution]] was largely about a failure to control borderlands, and the same is seen in modern [[Burma]], with the [[Karen State]] among others being de-facto independent (especially relevant with the [[Myanmar Civil War]]). Borders can have sharp economic divides and be magnets for migration.
Four types of borderlands are proposed by Oscar Martinez: hostile alienated borderlands, unfriendly co-existant, linked interdependent, and totally unified integrated. A border heartland exists directly adjacent, where the border dominates life, with intermediate and outer zones feeling less influence. Borderlands are spatial but undepicted on maps, instead shown in a crisp, hugely symbolic line.
Time is important. Borders start with an initial, infant conception, which starts to influence lives in its adolescent stage, an adult borderland starts to separate those between the border and it is fully felt and respected, a decline sees the reemergence of cross-border activities, often economic, and finally a defunct borderland sees the full rebuilding and repairing of ties, even if influences remain (i.e. [[Fall of the Berlin Wall]]). Sharp differences created by borderlands can create vastly different economic and political conditions, creating a center for activity. Some borders are clearly delineated in terms of ethnic or linguistic background, which may morph over time (originally the French-Belgian border saw a complete barrier in terms of Flemish being spoken, which is not the case today). 
Historically, borderlands have been seen as passive entities, with states meant to deal with them. Asia has had histories of territoriality and autochthonous ideas of borders which clashed with colonial conceptions, something Latin America lacked. Unlike the US-Canada border which allows natives to pass between the border unhindered, Latin American borders ignore traditional indigenous territory. African borders were drawn with more consideration than often believed, respecting political alliances and using a deeper knowledge of pre-colonial structures, including that of borders: however the briefness of African colonialism meant a short time for statebuilding, unique to the continent.

### Full Citation:
Michiel Baud and Willem van Schendel, “Toward a Comparative History of  
Borderlands,” Journal of World History 8, no. 2 (Fall 1997)
Tags:  #political-science #source
Dates Read:
Date Created: 16-1-2024
Status: #status/draft