# Xunzi
## Background
Xunzi was a [[Confucianism|Confucian]] scholar.  Unlike [[Mengzi]], he did not believe that human nature was fundamentally good.
## Chapter Summaries
### 1: An Exhortation to Learning
Learning must never stop, and neither should reflection.  Pondering is not worth learning, seeing the heights of heaven is how to appreciate it.  By compiling enough virtue, one will gain a sage-like heart.  The emphasis is on continuing to learn; it takes time to appreciate the heights of virtue.  By starting by reciting the classics and ending by learning ritual, one is learning.  The purpose of learning cannot stop for a moment, and only stops for death; its pursuit makes you human and you appreciate the completeness of everything between Earth and heaven.  Everything a gentleman does is benevolent as it enters into his body.  By appreciating learning through a virtuous person, one learns much quicker.  Without this you will blindly follow the Odes and be a vulgar scholar.  Not appreciating the classes of everything and appreciting the gravity of the importance of learning makes you not "good at learning;" you need perfect accuracy.  By loving virtue more than everything else, you can be said to have grasped it and become a perfect person.
### 2: Cultivating Oneself
By observing the goodness of others, one can inspect it in yourself.  You desire to hold onto the good you have and reproach what you do that is evil.  Good criticism and support makes teachers and friends, wheras flattery is villainy.  A good person can receive criticism, wishing to better oneself, wheras a petty person wants to never hear it.  He consider those that reproach him villains.  If you act in accord with ritual you will propser, and you will be ill if not.  You will be graceful if you follow it, barbaric if you don't.  There are ways of pacifying qi which go against one's nature.  Nobility and wealth do not mean much with a love of virtue.  Virtue and baseness (exemplified by following Mozi) are universally held.  A gentleman is always reverant no matter the situation.
### 19: Discourse on Ritual
Rituals are made to stop chaos from developing from human desire.  Abiding by ritual nurtures your life like food nurtures your body.  By only focusing on living, one paradoxically dies.  Confucians cause people to gain twice as much, [[Mozi|Mohists]] to lose twice as much.  Rulers and teachers bring order, like heaven and ancestors nurture oneself.  Ritual is, in a way, perfect, creating a standard for and path to benevolence.  It is like a scale, creating an objective measure for good and bad conduct.  Generosity, greatness, and enlightenment are products of ritual.  If birth and death are good, then life is good, and special care is taken toward both.  Convicts are given sparse funerals, as Mozi would give everyone, and thus Mozi is treating loved, trusted members of communities like convicts.  Mohism "steals" from the dead to give to the living, confusion is "stealing" from the living to give to the dead, and murdering people is villainy.  Mourning should be a year, but is three years to add loftiness to it (compare to [[Confucius' Analects#17|Analects 17]])).  Ritual sacrifices are meant to instill filial piety and respect.  Human nature is the raw material which ritual beautifies through deliberate effort.
### 20: Discourse on Music
Music is joy, and joy is felt through music.  Music has form and rulers in order to bring order from chaos, as music is the shape of joy.  It is a way to express music without being excessive, while Mozi denounces music as unecessary.
### 23: Human Nature is Bad
Goodness is not emergent from human nature, but concious effort against it.  Greed and hatred are undeniably human emotions which lead to evil.  Thus, teachers and ritual are needed to conciously transform evil nature into benevolence.  Humans are like wood and metal which have to be formed into useful shapes, but which are useless without effort.  He disputes [[Mengzi]]'s view that nature is good, by saying that nature is what is attained without practice, and the fact that learning makes one good means that it requires a concious exertion of effort.  Sages are like craftsmen which use deliberate effort to produce models and rituals, and thus it does not require human nature to be good for sages to exist.  Ritual can make any person benevolent, and without it people will not even be filial.  People desire what they cannot have, and so people desire to be good because they are bad (what about a spectrum?  why is this black and white?).  If people were good, why would sage kings and ritual be needed to bring order?  Thus, Mengzi's philosophy does not follow the real world.  Any person could become benevolent with practice, but the fact that not everyone is benevolent belies the fact that human nature is not necesarily good. 

## References:
Tags: #philosophy/chinese #time/classical-era #asia/china #source
30-1-2022
Status: #status/draft